britain only succeeds when working people succeed. this is a plan to reward hard work, share prosperity and build a better britain.britain can be betterthe labour party manifesto 2015
the labour party manifesto 2015labours manifesto budget responsibility lockour manifesto begins with the budget responsibility lock we offer the british people. it is the basis for all our plans in this manifesto because it is by securing our national finances that we are able to secure the family finances of the working people of britain.the budget responsibility lock guarantees that:every policy in this manifesto is paid for. not one commitment requires additional borrowing. we are the first party to make that pledge and with this manifesto it is delivered. we will legislate to require all major parties to have their manifesto commitments independently audited by the office for budget responsibility.a labour government will cut the deficit every year. the first line of labours first budget will be: this budget cuts the deficit every year. this manifesto sets out that we will only lay a budget before the house of commons that cuts the deficit every year, which the obr will independently verify.we will get national debt falling and a surplus on the current budget as soon as possible in the next parliament. this manifesto sets out that we will not compromise on this commitment.
contentsforeword by ed miliband... p5 a better future for britain... p7building an economy that works for working people... p15providing world-class health and education services... p31helping our families and communities to thrive... p43reforming government to give more power to people... p61standing up for britains interests in europe and the world... p73time for change... p83
4 the labour party manifesto 2015
forewordwe are a great country. with great people. in the last five years i have heard your stories, your hopes and your dreams. and i have heard too your frustrations.the countless people working as hard as they possibly can and still struggling to pay the bills. the young people with great ambitions but great anxieties about the future. the dedicated staff of our nhs, who are deeply concerned about its future. and all those who have served our country, are now retired, and ask where our country is going.this manifesto is inspired by you.i take a simple view. we are a great country, but we can be even betterthe fundamental truth that runs through this manifesto is that britain will only succeed when working people succeed. it is an idea at the heart of my beliefs. and it drives our better plan for a better future.it means a country where hard work is rewarded, with high skill, high wage jobs. an economy built on strong and secure foundations, where we balance the books.it means building a future for all our young people, so they can get world-class apprenticeships and access to affordable, higher education. it means strong public services, rescuing our nhs.it means strong communities, where power is shared by people in every part of the country and where we respond to peoples concerns about immigration, with proper controls.it means a britain where everyone plays by the same rules, including those at the very top of our society. and it means an outward looking country, engaged in the world for our national interest.for me, the privilege of serving as prime minister in our country would be for one purpose alone: to work every day to help build a country that works again for working people. this manifesto is our plan to achieve that goal.ed miliband

we will build a better future for britain
8a better future for britainbritain is a great country ready to build a better future.this manifesto sets out labours plan for national renewal.the british people, are known for tolerance, responsibility to others and for our belief in the value of hard work. we look confidently outward to the world. these are great british traditions - things we all believe in, things our country is good at. we are at our best when we work together. we see this every day in our workplaces, in our families, and in our communities. people want to get on, they want to give their children a better future, and they want to help to change britain for the better.but across britain working people also know a simple truth: the economy is not working for them. for years now, our economy has not rewarded everyone who put in a good, honest days work. however hard people work, many dont earn enough to make ends meet. too many have been driven from secure, full-time work, into precarious, badly paid jobs  many working on zero-hours contracts. time to enjoy friends and family is increasingly squeezed, as mothers and fathers juggle the demands of work and caring for children, and often an older relative.the problems mount for the next generation too. young people are taking on a mountain of debt to go to university and too many still cannot find a job worthy of their talents. we lack a proper system of vocational education and apprenticeships to give our young people the start in life that they deserve. we are not building the homes we need. our sons and daughters have been shut out of the housing market and too often they are forced to leave the communities where they were brought up.our economy and our system of government are failing people. many have come to believe that politics ignores the things that matter to them. too much power is unaccountable, concentrated in the market and the state, at the expense of individuals and their communities.many of these problems have been mounting for years. some, like the rise of inequality, are felt in countries all around the world. so the conservatives did not cause all of them, but they have made them far worse. their view is that economic success depends just on a few at the top. they think that insecurity
will make people work harder and that low pay is the only way to be competitive in the global market. they dont believe we can afford decent public services when times are hard. they have been giving power to large unaccountable firms rather than to people, and now they want to make deeper cuts in the next three years than we have seen in the last five years.there are some who believe there is nothing we can do to change things for the better. they feel powerless. they are losing faith that those with power will ever listen to them. we understand these feelings. but we believe we can renew our country and make a better future for working people. we have learned the lessons of the past. we were in government for thirteen years and left the country a far better place to live in. but we did not get everything right. we have learned and we have changed.labour is renewing our traditions as the party of work, family and community. we believe in a society of trust and mutual obligation, in which we look after the vulnerable, and people can bring up their families with hope for a better future. and we believe in helping people to help themselves, both to improve their own communities, and to achieve their ambitions.we are also the party of equality. we believe that no person should suffer discrimination or a lack of opportunity. the decisions we take in government will always be taken with this in mind. the policies in our manifesto will help remove the barriers that stand in the way of greater equality. we know we achieve more when we work together to challenge inequalities of power and build a common good.in this election, the country has a choice. we can continue with a conservative plan based on the view that success comes only from a privileged few at the top. or we can change direction, begin to return power to people and build an economy together in which everyone can contribute to a shared and enduring prosperity.we believe that britain only succeeds when working families succeed. as the economy at last recovers, people want the opportunity to use their skills and talents to make a better life for themselves and their children. our countrys greatest asset is the hard work and talent of our people.the labour party manifesto 2015 9
10a better future for britainlabours plan is to build firmer economic foundations for creating wealth, rewarding hard work and competing in the world.we will balance the books by cutting the deficit every year, with a surplus on the current budget and with national debt falling as soon as possible in the next parliament. this will need common sense spending reductions, outside of the protected areas of health, education and international development. we will ask those with incomes over 150,000 a year to contribute a little more through a 50p rate of tax. and we will build the high-skill, high-wage economy we need to raise tax revenues and control social security spending.we will improve the security and reward of working life by raising the national minimum wage to more than 8 an hour by october 2019, banning exploitative zero-hours contracts and promoting the living wage. we will create more paths to success for our young people by introducing a gold-standard system of technical education and training, and the guarantee of an apprenticeship for every school leaver with the grades.we will support families by expanding free childcare from 15 to 25 hours for working parents of three and four-year-olds, while doubling paid paternity leave for fathers. we will help with household bills freezing energy prices until 2017, while reforming the broken energy market. and we will make sure that at least 200,000 new homes a year are built by 2020, and that private renters get a fairer deal. the bedroom tax is cruel and we will abolish it.we will build up our nhs so that it has time to care, funding 8,000 more gps, 20,000 more nurses and 3,000 more midwives, paid for by a mansion tax on properties worth over 2 million, a levy on tobacco firms, and by tackling tax avoidance. and we will bring together services for physical health, mental health and social care into a single system built around the individual.we want a high quality education for all of our children. we will protect the education budget and raise teaching standards, making sure there are smaller class sizes for five, six and seven-year-olds.
the common life we share is who we are as a country. not everyone is the same, but each of us sharing a sense of belonging, being valued equally and being able to contribute to the common good. immigration has made an important contribution to our economic and social life, but it needs to be properly controlled. with a labour government, migrants from the eu will not be able to claim benefits until they have lived here for at least two years. we will make it illegal to undercut wages by exploiting migrant workers, and work to strengthen integration within our communities. everyone who works with the public in our public services must be able to speak english.we will help to make communities safer, by protecting and strengthening neighbourhood policing, countering extremism, and putting in place tough new laws to reduce violence against women and child sexual exploitation.people want more say in the decisions that affect their lives. we, in labour, know that government has to do things differently. the old command and control politics  doing things to and for people, but never with them  will not work. we need a new approach to government that involves more people in decisions that affect them. so we will devolve more power and control, not only to scotland and wales, but to our great english cities and county regions too. and we will share power and responsibility with people in their communities to help them help themselves and shape their services in response to their local circumstances.our country faces global challenges of climate change, terrorism and the spread of disease. in particular, tackling climate change is an economic necessity and the most important thing we must do for our children, our grandchildren and future generations. a labour government will face up to these challenges and re-engage with the world. we will build alliances in europe, promoting our countrys interests and security, and standing up for human rights and social justice. we will work to reform the european union, and we will retain our membership of it.labours plan for national renewal will bring about real, meaningful change that each person will be able to feel in their daily life. we know that to make britainthe labour party manifesto 2015 11
12a better future for britaina better country, opportunity must belong to everyone and not just a few. we will lend a helping hand to all those who need it, but we will also ask more of individuals and communities. we can only rebuild our country if everyone plays their part and feels they have a stake in society.we believe in living within our means. we will not make promises we cannot keep, and we will not introduce changes unless they are funded. there is not a single policy in this manifesto that is funded by additional borrowing. not a single one.our plan is to build a secure, prosperous and more equal country open to the world, in which everyone has the opportunity to get on and do their best. we will provide strong and effective government but everyone will need to contribute and play their part. it will be hard, but working together we can do it.
the labour party manifesto 2015lesley, physicist13
14ryan, sean, jake, daniel and sam, apprentices
we will build an economy that works forworking people
16building an economy that works for working peoplewe know a simple truth. britain only succeeds when working families succeed. it is how our country has won through in the past and how it will succeed in the future. but so many people are putting in the hours and not seeing the rewards. that is why there is a cost of living crisis. our first task in government is to change our economy so that it works for all of britains businesses and working people.the conservatives claim that the economy is fixed and that our country is on the right track. but the economy is not creating the productive, high-skilled and well-paid jobs that we need to raise living standards. the lack of rewarding work and training opportunities is trapping hundreds of thousands of young people in a cycle of benefits and low-paid, insecure jobs. and consumers are overcharged in markets they rely on to meet their everyday needs, whether to heat their homes or travel to work.for most of the 20th century, there was a vital link between the success of the country and family finances. as the country got better off, so did working people. but the link between the success of the country and the family budget has been broken. since 2010, working people are earning on average 1,600 less a year after inflation. we have seen the greatest fall in wages over a parliament since 1874.over five million people are in low-paid jobs, earning less than the living wage. there are 1.8 million zero-hours contracts. 1.3 million are working part-time because they cannot get a full-time job. half of all those in poverty live in working households. 900,000 people, many of them in work, used food banks last year.this cost-of-living crisis is bad for families, bad for business, and bad for britain. lower levels of pay have meant lower tax receipts and higher spending on social security.we will have to work and earn our way toward a more fairly shared and enduring prosperity. we are a great commercial nation that has been at the centre of global trade for centuries. we have a long tradition of innovation and enterprise.
we have been quick to seize the opportunities of the internet. we have big strengths to build upon: world-leading universities, an outstanding science research base, an open economy with one of the highest rates of foreign direct investment in the world, and many successful global companies.an inclusive wealth-creating economy works when there is a shared sense of responsibility, so we will be a government that is both pro-business and pro-worker. we value all our businesses as organisations of innovation and wealth production, and we will work strategically with them to create wealth. we value our trade unions as an essential force for a decent society and as guarantors of skills and fair wages.a strong economic foundationthe next labour government will balance the books. we will only lay a budget before the house of commons that cuts the deficit every year, which the office for budget responsibility will independently verify. we will get national debt falling and a surplus on the current budget as soon as possible in the next parliament and these fiscal commitments will not be compromised. we will tackle the root causes of the deficit by building a more productive economy with living standards that rise year-on-year.the conservative-led government promised to balance the books in this parliament. but this promise has been broken. the conservatives will leave the country borrowing over 75 billion this year.labours plan to balance the books means making tough, but fairer choices. we will reverse the governments top-rate tax cut so that the highest one per cent of earners, with an income of over 150,000, contribute a little more to help get the deficit down. we will stop paying winter fuel payments to the richest five per cent of pensioners, and cap child benefit rises for two years. outside of the protected areas of health, education and international development there will be cuts in spending. ministerial pay will be cut and then frozen until we have balanced the books. all proceeds from the sale of our stakes in lloyds and rbs will be used to repay the national debt.the labour party manifesto 2015 17
18building an economy that works for working peoplewe will live within our means. we have no proposals for any new spending paid for by additional borrowing. all of our commitments will be paid for by reducing spending elsewhere or by raising extra revenue. for example, we will introduce a tax on properties worth over 2 million to help raise the 2.5 billion a year for an nhs time to care fund  part of our plan to save and improve the health service. we will legislate to require all major parties to have their manifesto commitments independently audited by the office for budget responsibility at each general election.we will cap structural social security expenditure in each spending review so that it is properly controlled. we will implement the proposals of labours zero-based review, which has already identified savings we will make through reforming old government bureaucracies, devolving power and services to our towns and cities, and redesigning public services, and which we will continue in government. we will invest to prevent social problems rather than waste money reacting to them. and we will use digital technology to create a more responsive, devolved, and less costly system of government.fairer taxeswe will create a fairer tax system, helping those on middle and lower incomes by introducing a lower 10p starting rate of tax, paid for by ending the conservatives marriage tax allowance. we will not increase the basic or higher rates of income tax or national insurance. nor will we raise vat, and we renew our pledge not to extend it to food, childrens clothes, books, newspapers or public transport fares.our first finance bill will close the tax loopholes that cost the exchequer billions of pounds a year. we will introduce tougher penalties for those abusing the tax system, end unfair tax breaks used by hedge funds and others, and bear down on disguised employment. we will seek international agreement to make country-by-country reporting information publicly available, and we will act at home if agreement is not reached. british overseas territories and crown dependencies will be required to produce publicly available registries of the real owners of companies based there.
we will carry out an immediate review into the culture and practices of hmrc so that everyone follows the same rules and we increase the rigour of the tax system. and we will abolish non-dom status so that all those who make the uk their home pay tax in the same way as the rest of us.it is by tackling tax avoidance in this concerted fashion that we can reduce the deficit and protect the family budgets of working people.improving productivity and a new industrial strategylabour will improve productivity by building a long-term investment culture in the private and public sectors, and supporting small businesses in their growth to becoming british success stories of the future. with labour, britain will continue to have the most competitive rate of corporation tax in the g7.building world-class infrastructure will be crucial to fostering economic growth. we will create certainty for investors by taking a long-term approach to the major investment decisions facing the country. we will set up an independent national infrastructure commission to assess how best to meet britains infrastructure needs. it will make recommendations to government, monitor their implementation, and hold government to account. these measures and our long-term approach will help reinforce britains status as one of the worlds greatest centres of science and engineering.we will continue to support the construction of high speed two, but keep costs down, and take action to improve and expand rail links across the north to boost its regional economies. we will support long-term investment in strategic roads, address the neglect of local roads, and promote cycling.following the davies review, we will make a swift decision on expanding airport capacity in london and the south east, balancing the need for growth and the environmental impact.the labour party manifesto 2015 19
20building an economy that works for working peoplescientific discovery and technological innovation will drive economic advancement this century. we will introduce a new long-term funding policy framework for science and innovation, providing the stability and continuity that our companies and research institutes need to succeed.we will work to make britain a world leader in low carbon technologies over the next decade, creating a million additional green jobs. this aim will be supported by ambitious domestic carbon reduction targets, including a legal target to remove the carbon from our electricity supply by 2030, and a major drive for energy efficiency.our industrial strategy for the green economy will end the current uncertainty for investors, with a timetable for the green investment bank to be given additional powers so that it can invest in green businesses and technology. we will create an energy security board to plan and deliver the energy mix we need, including renewables, nuclear, green gas, carbon capture and storage, and clean coal.for onshore unconventional oil and gas, we will establish a robust environmental and regulatory regime before extraction can take place. and to safeguard the future of the offshore oil and gas industry, we will provide a long-term strategy for the industry, including more certainty on tax rates and making the most of the potential for carbon storage.labours longer-term approach will drive innovation and build on our strengths as a leader in digital technology. we are just at the start of the internet revolution. digital technology has transformed start-up costs making it easier to run your own business. there is a widening in the application of new transformative technologies in the fields of robotics, genetics, 3d printing and big data. our economy is developing a network of connections that will revolutionise innovation.labour will ensure that all parts of the country benefit from affordable, high speed broadband by the end of the parliament. we will work with the industry and the regulator to maximise private sector investment and deliver the mobile infrastructure needed to extend coverage and reduce not spots, including in areas of market failure. and we will support community-based campaigns to reduce the proportion of citizens unable to use the internet and help those who need it to get the skills to make the most of digital technology.
our universities are amongst the finest in the world. some are already helping our regional economies by forming strong links with industry and creating high-tech clusters. they have already spun out hundreds of companies creating thousands of jobs. we will support this model of knowledge clusters, especially outside the south east.britains economy is being held back by the culture of short-termism, which is a major obstacle to the development of productive businesses and industries. we will reform corporate governance to protect our leading firms from the pressure to put tomorrows share price before long-term growth potential.institutional investors will have a duty to act in the best interests of ordinary savers. they will have to prioritise long-term growth over short-term profits for the companies in which they are investing. we will change takeover rules to enhance the role of long-term investors by restricting voting to those already holding shares when a bid is made. in addition, we will strengthen the public interest test.we will improve the link between executive pay and performance by simplifying pay packages, and requiring investment and pension fund managers to disclose how they vote on top pay. and we will make sure employees have a voice when executive pay is set by requiring employee representation on remuneration committees.in this way we can start to create an economy based on mutual obligations, encouraging employers and employees to build partnerships for improving both business performance and job quality. outdated practices, like blacklisting, have no place in a modern economy.our charities, mutuals, co-operatives and social enterprises are pioneering new models of production that enhance social value, promote financial inclusion, and give individuals and communities power and control. we will continue to support and help develop the social economy by improving access for co-operative and mutual organisations to growth finance through the new british investment bank. and we will consider how to support employee buy-outs when businesses are being sold.the labour party manifesto 2015 21
22building an economy that works for working peoplewe will safeguard the public interest in the royal mail, supporting the creation of a staff-led trust for the employee share, and keeping the remaining 30 per cent in public ownership. we will also support the universal service obligation, ensuring competition does not undermine it and introducing protections as necessary.backing small businesssmall businesses are the backbone of our economy. their creativity and dynamism are vital for raising productivity and competing in the global economy. labour will give them a voice at the heart of government  a small business administration, which will ensure procurement contracts are accessible and regulations are designed with small firms in mind.we will address rising costs for small businesses and strengthen rules on late payment. labour will put small businesses first in line for tax cuts. instead of cutting corporation tax again for the largest firms, we will cut, and then freeze business rates for over 1.5 million smaller business properties.we will develop a banking system that works for businesses in every region and every sector in britain. the long-standing problems of our banking system mean that too many small and medium-sized businesses cannot get the finance they need to invest and grow.labour will establish a british investment bank with the mission to help businesses grow and to create wealth and jobs. it will have the resources to improve access to finance for small and medium-sized businesses, and will support a network of regional banks.we will increase competition on the high street. following the competition and market authorities inquiry we want a market share test and at least two new challenger banks. and we will deal with the scourge of household debt by introducing a new levy on payday lenders, using the funds raised to boost low-cost alternatives like credit unions.
better work and better paybritains route to prosperity and higher living standards is through more secure and better paid jobs. but conservative policies are causing whole sectors of the economy to be dragged into a race to the bottom on wages and skills. the government has weakened employment rights and promoted a hire-and- fire culture. labour believes our economy can only succeed in a race to the top  competing in the world with better work, better pay and better skills.too many people do a hard days work but remain dependent on benefits. we will raise the national minimum wage to more than 8 an hour by october 2019, bringing it closer to average earnings. we will give local authorities a role in strengthening enforcement against those paying less than the legal amount. and we will support employers to pay more by using government procurement to promote the living wage, alongside wider social impact considerations. our make work pay contracts will give tax rebates to businesses who sign up to paying the living wage in the first year of a labour government. publicly listed companies will be required to report on whether or not they pay the living wage.it is hard for britain to succeed when employees feel insecure and employers are undercut by those using exploitative working practices. labour will ban exploitative zero-hours contracts. those who work regular hours for more than 12 weeks will have a right to a regular contract. we will abolish the loophole that allows firms to undercut permanent staff by using agency workers on lower pay.the conservatives have introduced fees of up to 1,200 for employment tribunal claimants, creating a significant barrier to workplace justice. we will abolish the governments employment tribunal fee system as part of wider reforms to make sure that affordability is not a barrier to workers having proper access to justice, employers get a quicker resolution, and the costs to the tax payer do not rise.labour is the party of work, and we value working life. we will push up standards and boost productivity by implementing the commitments in labours workplace and business manifestos.the labour party manifesto 2015 23
24building an economy that works for working peoplesupporting the next generationover 700,000 of our young people are unemployed. too many of them do not have the skills they need for work. and yet in the past year the number of young people starting apprenticeships has fallen. the governments decision to triple university tuition fees leaves young people either starting their working lives burdened by 44,000 of debt, or without a clear alternative path to a decent career.labour will cut tuition fees from 9,000 to 6,000 a year, funded by restricting tax relief on pension contributions for the highest earners and clamping down on tax avoidance.we will tackle the growth of unpaid internships because thousands of highly able young people who cannot afford to work for free are locked out of too many of our professions.we will introduce a compulsory jobs guarantee, paid for by a bank bonus tax. it will provide a paid starter job for every young person unemployed for over a year, a job which they will have to take or lose benefits.for too long we have failed to provide a system which makes the best use of the talents of young people. so we will guarantee every school leaver that gets the grades an apprenticeship. we will create thousands more apprenticeships in the public sector, including the civil service. every firm getting a major government contract, and every large employer hiring skilled workers from outside the eu, will be required to offer apprenticeships.we will give employers more control over apprenticeships funding and standards. in return, we will ask them to increase the number of high quality apprenticeships in their sectors and supply chains. we will also give them the powers to deal with any free-riding employers who do not train.labours apprenticeships will be gold-standard qualifications. we will re-focus existing spending away from low-level apprenticeships for older people, and towards a system where apprenticeships are focused on new job entrants, lasting at least two years, and providing level three qualifications or above.
we will make sure that apprenticeships can lead to higher level qualifications by creating new technical degrees and supporting part-time study. they will be co-funded, co-designed and co-delivered by employers and they will be the priority for expansion within our university system.young people who do not have the skills they need should be in training, not on benefits. we will replace out of work benefits for 18 to 21-year-olds with a new youth allowance dependent on recipients being in training and targeted at those who need it most.mending the markets that people rely onlabour will stand up for working families and businesses against vested interests. we will reform the broken markets that people rely on most so that families and businesses get a fair deal.energy bills have risen by over 300 since 2010. many businesses say energy is the biggest cost they face. lack of competition and transparency has allowed the large energy companies to get away with increasing bills when wholesale prices rise, but not cutting them when they fall. the regulator has failed to take decisive action to protect consumers.labour will freeze energy bills until 2017, ensuring that bills can fall but not rise, and we will give the regulator the power to cut bills this winter. during the freeze, we will reform the energy market so that it delivers fairer prices and a better deal for working families. the generation and supply businesses of the big six energy companies will be separated. they will be required to open up their books, and they will have to sell their electricity through an open exchange. we will simplify energy tariffs and make it easier for people to compare prices to get the best deal. we will protect small businesses by ending unfair contracts and automatic rollovers to more expensive tariffs. a tough new energy watchdog will enforce our reforms, with powers to strip energy companies of their licences if they repeatedly harm the interests of consumers, and protect off-grid households.the labour party manifesto 2015 25
26building an economy that works for working peoplewe will bring down energy bills by making homes more energy efficient, delivering a million interest free loans for energy home improvements in the next parliament. for those on low incomes, we will make 200,000 homes warm every year, delivered street-by-street by local authorities and community organisations. privately rented properties will have to meet a decency standard, bringing warmth to a further three million homes.the water industry, too, also requires reform. one in five people struggle to pay their water bill. despite this, only a fraction of customers have benefited from the social tariffs offered by water companies. under our reforms all water companies will be required to sign up to a new national affordability scheme, helping those who cannot afford to pay their water bill. and we will strengthen the powers of the regulator to change licenses, limit price rises and enforce industry standards.living standards have been hit by fare increases on public transport. since 2010, rail fares have risen by 20 per cent, leaving passengers paying the highest fares in europe. similarly, bus fares have risen by 27 per cent while at the same time 2,000 bus routes have been cut.labour will reform our transport system in order to provide more public control and put the public interest first. we will review the franchising process as a priority to put in place a new system and avoid a repeat of the conservatives franchising fiasco. a new national rail body will oversee and plan for the railways and give rail users a greater say in how trains operate. we will legislate so that a public sector operator is allowed to take on lines and challenge the private train operating companies on a level playing field.rail fares will be frozen next year to help commuters while we implement reforms. a strict fare rise cap will be introduced on every route for any future fare rises, and a new legal right for passengers will be created to access the cheapest ticket for their journey.city and county regions will be given more power over the way buses are operated in their area. they will be able to decide routes, bear down on fares, drive improvements in services, and bring together trains, buses and trams into a single network with smart ticketing.
labour will:cut the deficit every year and balance the books as soon as possible in the next parliamentreverse the 50p tax cut so that the top one per cent pay a little more to help get the deficit downnot increase the basic or higher rates of income tax, national insurance or vatcut and then freeze business rates and maintain the most competitive corporate tax rates in the g7abolish non dom statusincrease the national minimum wage to more than 8 an hour by october 2019 and introduce make work pay contracts to provide tax rebates to firms becoming living wage employersban exploitative zero-hours contractsguarantee an apprenticeship for every school leaver who attains the grades and require any firm that gets a large government contract to offer apprenticeshipsreduce tuition fees to 6,000 a yearfreeze energy bills until 2017 and give the regulator the power to cut bills this winterintroduce a british investment bank and support a network of regional banks.the labour party manifesto 2015 27
28 the labour party manifesto 2015jayne, painter and decorator
the labour party manifesto 2015 29bhavesh, barber and salon owner
30monica, reception teacher
we will provide world-class health and educationservices
32providing world-class health and education servicesour nhs, care services, schools, colleges and other public services make up the essential fabric of our society. people need them to be able to live secure and fulfilling lives. britain needs them if we are tosucceed as a country. but under the conservatives they are under threat. the next labour government will protect, improve and invest in our public services, while giving individuals and communities more control over their design and delivery.the nhs is one of our great national institutions, and it is one of labours proudest achievements. it embodies our belief that by the strength of our common endeavour, we achieve more than we achieve alone. but the future of the nhs is under threat. the conservatives have put the wrong values at its heart, and patients are finding it harder to get the care they need.care is at the heart of labours values. no-one should fear old age or be left to struggle alone caring for a loved one. but too many older people suffer insecurity, loneliness and exclusion. and the growing social care crisis is one of the biggest challenges we face. since 2010, billions of pounds have been cut from budgets that pay for adult social care. the result has been 300,000 fewer older people getting vital care services, at the same time as the number of older people in need of care is increasing.a good education is vital to achieving personal fulfillment and economic prosperity. a good society depends upon an education system that can open minds and teach the skills and knowledge we each need to get on in life. but our education system is failing to meet the needs of young people who do not follow the traditional academic path from school to university.our public services are a measure of the strength and decency of our society. but we need a change in how we design them by pushing power down and organising them around individuals and families not centralised bureaucracies. good public services also need committed staff who are treated fairly and whose ethos of service is respected. they require decisions on pay that prioritise those on lower incomes, which are evidence-based, and which respect pay review body recommendations rather than brushing them aside irresponsibly.
government spends far too much money dealing with the symptoms of problems, instead of investing smaller amounts in dealing with their causes. every taxpayer pays the cost of low educational achievement, poor aspirations, drink and drug misuse, and criminality. so we will promote early-years intervention, supporting young children and their parents and dealing with problems before they get out of hand.we can save money and create more responsive services by building co-operation between public services and organisations. pooling funds across local areas reduces inefficiency and avoids duplication. services must be joined up in ways that make sense to the people who use them.labour will use digital technology in reforming our public services. people will be able to feed back on services quickly and simply, making sure their voices are heard, stimulating improvement and saving on the costs of service failure.the nhslabour will rescue our nhs, invest in its future and join up services from home to hospital.we will start with the promise of investment so that the nhs has time to care. the nhs is struggling with staffing shortages. accident and emergency is in crisis, and more people are facing long waits for tests, treatment, or to see a gp. labour will invest in 20,000 more nurses, 8,000 more gps, and 3,000 more midwives, paid for by a mansion tax on properties worth over 2 million, a levy on tobacco firms, and by tackling tax avoidance. the threshold for the mansion tax will rise in line with house prices for these high-value properties, and those on lower incomes will be protected with a right to defer the charge until the property changes hands.we will guarantee people a gp appointment within 48 hours, and on the same day for those who need it. we will create a cancer treatments fund so patients have access to the latest drugs, surgery and radiotherapy. by 2020, patients will wait no longer than one week for vital cancer tests. catching the disease earlythe labour party manifesto 2015 33
34providing world-class health and education servicesis critical, so we will raise public awareness of symptoms and make sure there is training and support for gps in spotting early signs.the answer to the health challenges we face is not to set hospital against hospital, but to join up services around patients needs. we will repeal the governments health and social care act, scrapping the competition regime and restoring proper democratic accountability for the nhs. we will establish a sensible commissioning framework, based on the principle of an nhs preferred provider, to stop the drive towards privatisation and make sure that nhs services are not destabilised by competition and fragmentation. where private companies are involved in providing clinical services, we will impose a cap on any profits they can make from the nhs, to ensure that the needs of patients are always put first. we support the principles behind the negotiations on the transatlantic trade and investment partnership treaty (ttip). we will hold the european commission to account on issues of concern, including the impact on public services and the investor to state dispute settlement mechanism. and we will ensure the nhs is protected from the ttip treaty.our health reforms will focus on prevention and early intervention, and joining up services from home to hospital. when people cannot get to see their gp, many go to a&e instead. when mental health problems are not spotted early, people can deteriorate and need more intensive support. and when elderly people cannot get the care they need at home, they are more likely to end up in hospital.the current system is too fragmented. it was not designed for the growing numbers of people living with chronic conditions or multiple needs. rather than having three separate systems for dealing with physical, mental and social care, we will create a whole person approach: a single service to meet all of a persons health and care needs.this will be underpinned by new rights for patients. vulnerable older people, disabled people and those with complex needs will be helped to have more control of their lives with the entitlement to a personal care plan designed
with them and shaped around their needs, the option of personal budgets where appropriate, and a single named person to coordinate their care. they will also receive better information and advice on managing their condition. these changes will help to end the frustration of families sick of being passed from pillar to post between different individuals and agencies.commissioning and budgets will be brought together at a local level to join up services and make sure that providers are incentivised to help people stay healthy and outside hospital, rather than simply waiting for them to fall ill.mental health will be given the same priority as physical health. people will have the same right to psychological therapies as they currently have to drugs and medical treatments. to help address the problem of undiagnosed mental illness, nhs staff training will include mental health. we will increase the proportion of the mental health budget that is spent on children, and make sure that teachers have training so they can identify problems early and link children up with support. to support young peoples health and wellbeing, we will encourage the development of social and emotional skills, for example through the use of mindfulness to build resilience. and we will set out a strategy with the goal of ensuring that the great majority of patients can access talking therapies within 28 days, and that all children who need it can access school- based counselling.a greater emphasis on prevention and public health is essential, not just to improve outcomes and tackle inequalities, but to ensure the nhs remains sustainable. for example, 3.2 million people are currently diagnosed with diabetes, and it is estimated that spending on treatment will rise from 10 billion to 17 billion a year over the next 25 years if action is not taken, such as to reduce levels of obesity. we will set a new national ambition to improve the uptake of physical activity and take targeted action on those high strength, low cost alcohol products that fuel problem drinking. and we will set maximum permitted levels of sugar, salt and fat in foods marketed substantially to children.the labour party manifesto 2015 35
36providing world-class health and education serviceseveryone involved in the nhs must learn lessons when things go wrong, for example, from the failings at mid-staffordshire and morecambe bay. labour will prioritise action to improve care quality and patient safety. in addition to recruiting extra nurses to help provide safe levels of staffing on wards, we want every hospital death to be subject to an appropriate level of review. we will also take action to modernise the regulation of healthcare professionals.care in older agelabour will support people in their older age. growing old should be a positive and fulfilling experience. but our social care system is close to collapse, with older people often receiving visits limited to just 15 minutes, provided by a workforce that is too often undervalued.labour supports measures to cap the costs of care and will prioritise improving the quality of care services.working with local authorities and care providers, labour will end time-limited 15-minute visits, introducing year-of-care budgets to incentivise better care in the home. by stopping the use of zero-hours contracts, where regular hours are being worked, we will improve the working life of care workers.for older people, the normal setting for care should increasingly be the home, not the hospital. we will recruit 5,000 new home-care workers  a new arm of the nhs  to help care for those with the greatest needs at home. this will include supporting more people to remain at home at the end of their life, including those who are terminally ill with the greatest care needs.we will also introduce a system of safety checks to identify risks facing vulnerable older people and enable preventative measures to be put in place, such as grab rails to prevent falling.
the burden of the care crisis is falling on carers, especially women, who account for six in every ten carers. labour will introduce a new duty on nhs organisations to identify carers so that they can be linked up with the right support. we will ring-fence the money councils get for carers breaks to ensure this money gets spent on carers.a high quality education for all our childrenlabour sees investment in education as an investment both in our children and in the future of the country. we will protect the entire education budget, including the early years, schools and post-16 education, so that it rises in line with inflation.however investment on its own is not enough. we need to create a route to success for the 50 per cent of young people who do not go down the traditional academic route. we will raise the standard and status of vocational and technical education, with a high quality vocational route from school through to employment. the technical baccalaureate, a vocational award for 16 to 18-year-olds, will combine a gold-standard qualification accredited by employers, with a quality work placement.we will transform high performing further education colleges with strong links to industry, into new specialist institutes of technical education, with a remit to deliver the technical baccalaureate and higher-level skills. we will support more young people to gain the core skills they need for employment and further study. with labour, students will continue to study english and maths to age 18 and undertake work experience between the ages of 14 and 16. and to ensure young people are equipped to make the best choices for their future, we will introduce a new, independent system of careers advice, offering personalised face-to-face guidance on routes into university and apprenticeships.we believe fundamentally that a world-class education system is made by excellent teachers. with labour, every teacher will need to gain qualified teacher status. we will encourage teaching quality by creating new career routes for teachers who are expert in their subject. these teachers will be able to attainthe labour party manifesto 2015 37
38providing world-class health and education servicesa new master teacher status. teachers will also be expected to update their knowledge and skills as a condition of remaining in the profession, and we will support plans for a new college of teaching. these measures will help us close the attainment gap between disadvantaged children and their peers, and work towards all children reading well by age 11. we have supported the successful teach first since its inception and will continue to do so.a new school leadership institute will support headteachers and improve school leadership. it will accredit gold-standard headship qualifications, support leadership training and development, and identify and develop the school leaders of the future.the government has attempted to oversee thousands of schools from the centre. this approach is not working. underperformance is going unchallenged and parents do not have enough of a voice. labour will introduce new directors of school standards at a local level to monitor performance, intervene in underperforming schools and support them to improve.where a majority of local parents have concerns about underperformance, or a dip in standards, they will be able to call in their local director of school standards to hold a school to account.labour will promote innovation in schools. we will give all schools freedoms currently only granted to some. directors of school standards will be responsible for commissioning new schools where there is a shortage of school places, encouraging innovative bids from established providers, good local authorities, parents, teachers and entrepreneurs. they will also encourage local schools to work together to improve the quality of education.we will end the wasteful and poorly performing free schools programme, and switch resources to where they are needed, allowing us to cap class sizes for five, six and seven-year-olds at 30 pupils or under.private schools currently benefit from generous state subsidies, including business rates relief worth hundreds of millions of pounds. we believe they should do more to contribute to raising standards in state education to justify receiving this subsidy. as a condition for continued business rate relief, private
schools will be required to form a meaningful partnership with a school, or cluster of schools, in the state sector.children develop and learn best when they are secure and happy. we need to help our children develop the creativity, self-awareness and emotional skills they need to get on in life. we will introduce compulsory age-appropriate sex and relationships education. we will encourage all schools to embed character education across the curriculum, working with schools to stop the blight of homophobic bullying.the labour party manifesto 2015 39
labour will:invest 2.5 billion more than the conservatives to recruit 8,000 more gps, 20,000 more nurses and 3,000 more midwivesguarantee gp appointments within 48 hours and cancer tests within one weekjoin up services from home to hospital, with a single point of contact for all who need itgive mental health the same priority as physical health, with a new right to access talking therapiesrepeal the governments privatisation plans, cap profits and put the right values back at the heart of the nhsend time-limited 15 minute social care visits and recruit 5,000 new home-care workers to support people in their homeintroduce a new gold-standard technical baccalaureate for 16 to-18-year oldsprotect the entire education budget from early years through to post-16 educationguarantee all teachers in state schools will be qualifiedappoint directors of school standards to drive up standards in every area cap class sizes for five, six and seven-year-oldsensure all young people study english and maths to age 18.40providing world-class health and education services
the labour party manifesto 2015joyce, nurse41
42cheryl and neil, with their daughter louisa
we will help our families and communitiesto thrive
44helping our families and communities to thriveas a country we value compassion, tolerance and a sense of decency. but pressures on family life, growing inequality, anxieties about crime and anti-social behaviour, and a widespread loss of trust in our governing institutions, are creating insecurity in many communities.labour believes a decent society grows out of family life and relationships, out of the work we do, and the local places to which we belong. we will help to create a more secure and inclusive society by building and strengthening the institutions that help individuals, families and communities to thrive.supporting families and relationshipspeoples relationships bind society together, and the family, in all its various shapes and sizes, is its bedrock. but low pay, the pressures of work and caring for children and elderly relatives, have put families under increasing pressure.we will help families by expanding free childcare from 15 to 25 hours per week for working parents of three and four-year-olds, paid for with an increase in the bank levy. we will also introduce a legal guarantee for parents of primary school children to access wraparound childcare from 8am to 6pm through their local primary school. as well as helping parents, this will provide children with before and after-school clubs and activities, helping to raise their aspirations and attainment. this will be underpinned by a new national primary childcare service, a not for profit organisation to promote the voluntary and charitable delivery of quality extracurricular activities.labour recognises the vital importance of the power of peoples relationships to build the capacity for love, care and resilience. we will prioritise early years intervention to give children and parents the best start in family life, and restore the role of sure start centres as family hubs. sure start will have an obligation to provide families with access to childcare, opening their facilities to charities and local childcare providers. more widely, we will encourage local services to co-locate, so that they work together to shift from sticking plaster solutions to integrated early help.
we will take a whole-family approach to policy making, supporting relationships, and the involvement of fathers, grandparents and relatives in the care, education and health of children.more fathers want to play an active role in their childrens lives and families want to spend more time together with a new baby. so we will double the current two weeks of paternity leave to four weeks, and increase the amount of paternity pay from 140 to more than 260 a week. many grandparents want to be more involved in caring for their grandchildren, and we will support them in doing so.as a result of this governments failures, the commitment to ending child poverty by 2020 is very unlikely to be met. however, we will never forget how important a decent basic income is to a childs prospects and wellbeing. that is why we will keep the child poverty targets, and ask the office for budget responsibility to monitor and report on progress.we will promote the care and educational achievement of our most vulnerable children and we will introduce mandatory reporting of child abuse. we will increase support for children in kinship (family and friends) care and their families, a group too often overlooked and undervalued. we will continue to support frontline and its innovative approach to training social workers, and teachers will receive better training for working with children with special educational needs and disabilities.building new homesbritain is in the midst of the biggest housing crisis in a generation, with the lowest levels of house building in peacetime since the 1920s. young people have been priced out of home ownership. fewer affordable homes are being built, homelessness is rising, and millions face insecurity and poor standards in the private rented sector.everyone should be able to live in a secure home, whether they rent or buy. we will make sure that at least 200,000 homes a year get built by 2020  almostthe labour party manifesto 2015 45
46helping our families and communities to thrivedouble the current level  by implementing the recommendations of the lyons review. it is only by building more homes that peoples aspiration for home ownership will be fulfilled.our comprehensive plan to tackle the housing crisis will give local communities new powers to provide the homes they need, in the places they want to live. to help young people and families get on the housing ladder, we will give local authorities the power to give first call to first time buyers on new homes in areas of housing growth. and we will unlock a future homes fund by requiring that the billions of pounds saved in help to buy isas be invested in increasing housing supply.we want a housing market that rewards the building of high quality homes rather than land banking and speculation. so we will introduce greater transparency in the land market and give local authorities new use it or lose it powers to encourage developers to build.we will increase competition in the housebuilding industry by backing small builders, including through our help to build scheme, and by getting the public sector building again. we will build more affordable homes by prioritising capital investment for housing and by reforming the council house financing system. we will give local authorities powers to reduce the number of empty homes, including higher council tax on long term empty properties. and to boost the housing we need, we will start to build a new generation of garden cities.for the 11 million people who rent privately, we will legislate to make three-year tenancies the norm, with a ceiling on excessive rent rises. a ban on unfair letting agent fees will save renters over 600. we will drive standards up by creating a national register of private landlords.homelessness is the ultimate symbol of the housing crisis. labour reduced homelessness by 70 per cent when we were last in office, but all forms of homelessness are back on the rise, with rough sleeping having increased by 55 per cent. we are committed to reversing this trend by tackling the causes of homelessness and rough sleeping.
restoring social securitybritain needs a responsible and fair social security system that provides security when people lose their jobs or fall sick, as well as a decent income when they retire. the british people have always believed in the principle of contribution, rewarding those who pay in, helping people get back on their feet, and providing support in times of need.to guarantee a decent social security system for the next generation, we need to keep costs under control. under this government, the increase in low pay has left working families more reliant on tax credits and housing benefit, pushing up the social security bill.to get the benefits bill under control, we need to tackle the root causes of rising spending, by making work pay and building more homes. we will allow local authorities that negotiate rent reductions on behalf of tenants who are claiming housing benefit, to retain some of the savings, on the condition that the money is invested in building homes.we will keep the household benefit cap and ask the social security advisory committee to examine if it should be lower in some areas. and we will cap structural social security spending as part of each spending review, so that it is properly planned and controlled.labour believes in rewarding work and in restoring contribution to the heart of our system. so we will not cut tax credits. we want everyone who can to have the chance to contribute through paid work, so we will create a more tailored back-to-work system that helps people secure and keep jobs. we will do more to help unemployed people get the skills they need for work, testing jobseekers maths, english and it skills within six weeks of them claiming benefits. they will be required to take up training where this will improve their chances of getting a job. we support the principle behind universal credit  that there should be a smooth transition into work  but it must be affordable and fit for purpose, so we will pause and review the programme.the labour party manifesto 2015 47
48helping our families and communities to thrivethere will be a guaranteed, paid job for all young people who have been out of work for one year, and for all those over 25 years old and out of work for two years. it will be a job that they have to take, or lose their benefits. and we will commission a replacement for the work programme at a more local level, working with local authorities to join up support for the long-term unemployed. we will introduce a higher rate of job seekers allowance for those who have contributed over years. it will be funded by extending the length of time people need to have worked to qualify.supporting disabled people to live independentlyalongside strong and responsive public services, the social security system plays an important role in supporting many disabled people to live independently, and must always treat sick and disabled people with dignity.half a million families have been hit by the bedroom tax, and two thirds of those affected are disabled, or have a disabled family member. it is cruel, and we will abolish it.we will reform the work capability assessment and focus it on the support disabled people need to get into work. we will give an independent scrutiny group of disabled people a central role in monitoring it. and we will introduce a specialist support programme to ensure that disabled people who can work get more tailored help.older peopleolder people deserve to live a fulfilling life, to continue working if they wish, and to enjoy a secure retirement. older people have contributed all their lives and built the britain that the next generation will inherit. so it is right that they are supported with a fair and sustainable pensions system, responsive health services and a system of care over which they have control. we will keep the triple-lock so that the state pension increases by inflation, earnings, or 2.5 per
cent, whichever is highest. and while increases in the state retirement age are necessary to keep our pensions system affordable, we will ensure that people have time to plan for changes.we have taken the tough choice to restrict winter fuel payments for the richest five per cent of pensioners, but we will guarantee that there will be no additional changes to the winter fuel payments, free tv licences or bus passes for pensioners.alongside a decent state pension, we must ensure private pensions are good value for those who have saved. we will reform the pensions market so that pension providers put savers first, and protect consumers from retirement rip-offs. we support greater flexibility for those drawing down their pension pots, but there must be proper guidance for people to avoid mis-selling.controlling immigration with fair rulesfor our country to stay strong, with the confidence to look outwards rather than inwards, people need to feel secure in the strength of our borders, our communities, and in the workplace.britain has seen historically high levels of immigration in recent years, including low-skilled migration, which has given rise to public anxiety about its effects on wages, on our public services, and on our shared way of life.despite the conservatives promise to reduce net migration to tens of thousands, it is now higher than it was when david cameron entered downing street. broken promises erode trust.labour will never cut britain off from the rest of the world. our economy and our society benefit from the talent and investment of people who come here, including university students coming to study. but the system needs to be controlled and managed so that it is fair. low-skilled migration has been too high and needs to come down. we need much stronger action to stop illegal immigration.the labour party manifesto 2015 49
50helping our families and communities to thrivelabours plan starts with stronger borders. we will recruit an additional 1,000 borders staff, paid for by a small charge on non-visa visitors to the uk. we will introduce stronger controls to prevent those who have committed serious crimes coming to britain, and to deport those who commit crimes while they are here. we will introduce full exit checks, so that we can count people in and out of the country. short-term student visitor visas have dramatically increased, so we will tighten the system to prevent abuse, whilst welcoming overseas university students who bring billions into britain. and we will keep the cap on workers from outside the eu.we need fair rules at work to prevent the exploitation of migrant workers, which undercuts local wages and increases demand for further low-skilled migration. labour will introduce a new law to stop employers undercutting wages by exploiting workers. we will ban recruitment agencies from hiring only from overseas and crack down on rogue agencies by extending the remit of the gangmasters licensing authority where there is evidence of abuse.we need to strengthen our social integration and ensure that migrants can play their part in british society. people working in public services, in public facing roles, will be required to speak english. those who come here will not be able to claim benefits for at least two years, and we will stop child benefit being sent to families living abroad.we will enforce immigration rules humanely and effectively. we will end the indefinite detention of people in the asylum and immigration system, ending detention for pregnant women and those who have been the victims of sexual abuse or trafficking. and we will ensure britain continues its proud history of providing refuge for those fleeing persecution by upholding our international obligations, including working with the un to support vulnerable refugees from syria.
safer communitiescrime creates fear and insecurity. we can only live happy and fulfilled lives if we know that we are safe, and that we are not at risk of violation of our person or property.for too many people in our country that is not the reality they see in their communities. neighbourhood policing, the vital building block of british policing, is at risk of being destroyed. anti-social behaviour is too often tolerated, rather than dealt with. violent crimes have gone up, but fewer violent criminals are being caught. far too many victims of child sex abuse are being let down by the services that are supposed to keep them safe.labour believes british policing is at its best when it is rooted in local communities, proactively preventing crime, rather than simply reacting to emergencies.we will protect neighbourhood policing. by making different choices  to abolish police and crime commissioners, end the subsidy of firearms licenses, and mandate police forces to work closer together  we will be able to safeguard over 10,000 police officers for the next three years. this will be backed up by a new statutory local policing commitment, guaranteeing neighbourhood policing in every community.we will strengthen community safety partnerships to give local people a role in setting priorities for neighbourhood policing and a say over the appointment of local police commanders.to raise standards within policing, all police officers will be required to become chartered officers, holding a registration with the college of policing, and able to be struck off for serious misconduct, just as doctors and lawyers can be. a new police standards authority will replace the discredited independent police complaints commission. and we will work with the police to improve ethnic minority recruitment so that the police better reflect the communities they serve.the labour party manifesto 2015 51
52helping our families and communities to thrivethe next part of labours plan is preventing crime occurring in the first place. we will nip anti-social behaviour in the bud by making offenders put right the wrong they have done, with payback orders replacing low-level cautions. and we will ensure staff who work with the public are given greater protection, with tougher penalties for those who assault them.the last labour governments reforms of youth justice, which required agencies to collaborate in preventing youth offending, reduced both youth crime and the numbers of young people in prison. the next labour government will extend this model, piloting a new approach to 18 to 20-year-old offenders, incentivising local authorities, police and probation services to work together to identify those at risk of drifting into criminal activity and, where possible, divert them into a more constructive way of life. and we will work to embed restorative justice right across the youth justice system.we know drug addiction continues to be a major cause of crime. we will ensure drug treatment services focus on the root causes of addiction, with proper integration between health, police and local authorities in the commissioning of treatment. and we will ban the sale and distribution of dangerous psychoactive substances, so called legal highs.it is clear that we need a radical change in our approach to dealing with child abuse. we will bring in tough new powers enabling the police to prevent an adult from contacting or communicating with a child if there is evidence of abuse, and strengthen the vetting and barring regime. a new child protection unit will be established to work across government, driving progress in the prevention of child abuse and sexual exploitation.we need prisons that both punish and rehabilitate people. labour will do more to increase the amount of time prisoners spend working and learning. prisons will be measured by how successful they are in reforming prisoners and reducing their re-offending. we will also raise professional standards amongst prison officers, including through the creation of chartered prison officers, and confront the neglected problem of staff corruption.
we will enact britains first victims law to give victims of crime a voice and an entitlement to minimum standards of service from criminal justice agencies.ending violence against girls and womentwo women a week are killed by a current or former male partner. at least 750,000 children a year witness domestic violence. stopping violence against women and girls is a priority for labour.we will publish a violence against women and girls bill, appoint a commissioner to set minimum standards in tackling domestic and sexual violence, and provide more stable central funding for womens refuges and rape crisis centres.we will strengthen the law, banning the use of community resolutions as a response to domestic violence. the gun licensing regime will be tightened, so that people with a history of domestic or sexual violence will not be given an unrestricted license. and we will make changes to dna retention, so that rape suspects have their dna recorded and stored.victims of domestic violence need far better support. so we will widen access to legal aid for victims of domestic violence.tackling the threat from extremismthe threat from islamist extremism is increasing. hundreds of british citizens have joined islamic state  a movement that has engaged in savage violence, and racial and religious hatred.the british people have faced down terrorist threats before and will do so again, standing united together, not allowing ourselves to be divided.with labour, the security services will have the powers they need to disrupt and tackle terrorism. the government were wrong to weaken counter terror powers by scrapping control orders. with labour, dangerous suspects will be subject to proper controls.the labour party manifesto 2015 53
54helping our families and communities to thriveevery government department will be engaged in the work of preventing extremism and fighting terrorism. we will implement a much more rigorous strategy for dealing with people returning from the syrian conflict. alongside appropriate police action and prosecution, it will be mandatory for anyone returning to engage in a de-radicalisation programme designed to confront them with the consequences of their actions.we will need to update our investigative laws to keep up with changing technology, strengthening both the powers available, and the safeguards that protect peoples privacy. this is why labour argued for an independent review, currently being undertaken by david anderson. we will strengthen the oversight of our intelligence agencies to make sure the public can continue to have confidence in the vital work that they do to keep us safe.to defeat the threats of islamist terrorism, we must also engage with the personal, cultural and wider factors that turn young people to extremism. the prevent programme was set up under the last labour government to stop young people becoming radicalised. but this government has cut the funding and narrowed its focus. much of the work to engage muslim communities has been lost.we will overhaul the programme to involve communities in countering extremist propaganda, stopping young people being groomed, and also building resilient institutions for social integration. we applaud those faith communities who have pioneered an inter-faith dialogue for the common good.we will take a zero-tolerance approach to hate crime, such as anti-semitism and islamophobia. we will challenge prejudice before it grows, whether in schools, universities or on social media. and we will strengthen the law on disability, homophobic, and transphobic hate crime.arts and culturelabour believes that art and culture gives form to our hopes and aspirations and defines our heritage as a nation. the arts allow us to celebrate our common
humanity in the creation and celebration of beauty. the arts should belong to all and be open to all to take part in.we will guarantee a universal entitlement to a creative education so that every young person has access to cultural activity and the arts by strengthening creative education in schools and after-school clubs. institutions that receive arts funding will be required to open up their doors to young people, and we will work with public bodies to rebalance arts funding across the country.the last labour government made admission to our national museums and galleries free to all, leading to a major increase in the number of people experiencing our greatest cultural treasures. we reaffirm our commitment to universal free admission to ensure that our great works of art and national heritage can be enjoyed in all parts of the country.creativity is the powerhouse of a prosperous economy. it is the source of economic innovation and a powerful force in social renewal. we will increase the number of apprenticeships in the creative industries.we will create a prime ministers committee on the arts, culture and creative industries, with a membership drawn from all sectors and regions. the committee will bring issues of concern direct to the attention of the prime minister.sportsport brings us together in an expression of our local and national pride. it is where young people learn about leadership, teamwork, the pursuit of excellence and strength of character. with a labour government our children will participate in a minimum of two hours of organised sport every week at school.football clubs are an important part of many peoples identity and sense of belonging. they are more than just businesses. but despite their importance in the lives of their members and supporters, too often there are no effective means for fans to have a say in how their clubs are run. labour will providethe labour party manifesto 2015 55
56helping our families and communities to thrivethe means for supporters to be a genuine part of their clubs. we will introduce legislation to enable accredited supporters trusts to appoint and remove at least two of the directors of a football club and to purchase shares when the club changes hands. we will also review the role of fan participation in other sports.we will ensure the premier league delivers on its promise to invest five per cent of its domestic and international television rights income into funding the grassroots.protecting our environmentwe feel passionately about our local landscapes, our open spaces and wildlife. land and nature are part of our common home and inheritance, and they contribute to our sense of identity. in a globalised world, our local environment provides us with a sense of place and belonging.as we set out in more detail later on, a labour government will play a leading global role in tackling climate change. however, it will not be enough to simply mitigate the threat of climate change. we must adapt to its damaging effects, which are impacting on us today. we will produce an ambitious adaptation programme, and the new infrastructure commission will prioritise investment in flood prevention. we will deal with the problems of air pollution by giving local authorities the powers they need, backed up by a national framework.labour has always believed that everyone should have access to nature, whoever they are, or wherever they live. so we will keep our forests in public ownership, and promote access to green spaces in local planning. we will support the work of the natural capital committee to protect and improve wildlife habitats and green spaces, and make them an important part of our thriving tourism industry.
we will build on our strong record on animal welfare  starting with an end to the governments ineffective and cruel badger cull. we will improve the protection of dogs and cats, ban wild animals in circuses, defend the hunting ban and deal with wildlife crime associated with shooting.we want to create a world-leading food, farm and fisheries sector that creates better paid jobs and apprenticeships across the rural economy. we will put in place a long-term strategy for the sector, promote the best of british produce, and expand the role of the supermarket watchdog to support the growth of the sector, and protect food producers from unfair practices by the major supermarkets.the labour party manifesto 2015 57
labour will:extend free childcare from 15 to 25 hours for working parents of three and four-year-olds, and ensure all primary schools guarantee access to wraparound childcare from 8am to 6pmdouble paternity leave from two to four weeks and increase paternity pay by more than 100 a weekensure at least 200,000 new homes a year are built by 2020, with first priority for local first time buyersprovide security for renters by guaranteeing three-year tenancies with a ceiling on excessive rent risesintroduce a compulsory jobs guarantee, paid for by a bank bonus tax abolish the bedroom taxensure migrants will not be able to claim benefits until they have lived here for at least two yearsmake it illegal for employers to undercut wages by exploiting workersprotect neighbourhood policing by safeguarding over 10,000 frontline police officers over the next three yearsgive football fans a voice in club boardrooms.58helping our families and communities to thrive
the labour party manifesto 2015june, community activist59
60kirsty, student
we will reform government to give more powerto people
62reforming government to give more power to peoplepeople who live in this country know that too much power is concentrated in too few hands. those who make decisions on behalf of others, whether they are in westminster, the european union, inbusiness, the media, or the public sector, are too often unaccountable. our over-centralised system of government has prevented our nations, cities, county regions and towns from being able to take control and change things for themselves. we will end a century of centralisation.labour believes meaningful and lasting change for the better is only possible when people are given the power to change things for themselves. our governing mission is to break out of the traditional top-down, 'westminster knows best approach', and devolve power and decision-making to people and their local communities.from the city of london to silicon valley the worlds best industries tend to be clustered geographically. and too often economic challenges can be too, from our coalfields to some of our isolated seaside towns. so a labour government will unleash the potential of our city and county regions to drive economic growth and prosperity. we will reform institutions and devolve power to deal with the causes of our economic problems, and we will encourage local authorities to innovate to better serve their communities.instead of imposing change on communities, we will give them more control over schools, health care, policing, skills, housing and transport, making use of their insights into what works and what does not. we will promote and encourage a model of citizenship based on participation and shared responsibility.these measures are the start of big changes in how we govern ourselves as a union of nations. they will begin to transform the relationship between the citizen and the state.we will further develop digital government to enable better communication, more collaboration, and sharing of data between services. it will make services and transactions more efficient and simpler for people to use. to create a more connected society we will support making digital government more inclusive,
transparent and accountable. we will continue to back the principle of open data by default, releasing public sector performance data wherever possible.a better politicswe will give 16 and 17-year-olds the vote by may 2016, and improve the curriculum for citizenship education, so young people have the knowledge they need to play a full part in british society. we will encourage young peoples volunteering and social action by supporting the #iwill campaign of step up to serve, and the national citizens service.drawing on the work of the political and constitutional reform committee, we will take steps to ensure that the move to individual electoral registration does not leave millions unregistered, nor lead to constituencies that fail to take into account the people who live in them. this will include block registration by universities and care homes, extending northern irelands successful schools initiative, and exploring the scope for an automatic system of registration. labour remains committed to reforming political party funding and taking the big money out of politics by capping individual donations to parties.we will safeguard our democracy by repealing the lobbying act, which has gagged charities, and replace it with a tougher statutory register of lobbyists. we will ban mps from holding paid directorships and consultancies. and we will reform the legislative process to strengthen the publics voice and to better hold the government to account.the united kingdomlabour believes in the historic union of our nations working together for the common good. but as devolution has continued to gather pace, our union now needs to evolve. as a priority, we will set up a people-led constitutional convention to directly address this and to drive political reform of westminster.the labour party manifesto 2015 63
64reforming government to give more power to peoplelabour is committed to replacing the house of lords with an elected senate of the nations and regions, to represent every part of the united kingdom, and to improve the democratic legitimacy of the second chamber. it is also time to consider how english mps can have a greater role in the scrutiny of legislation that only affects england. this includes the option put forward by sir william mckay, of a committee stage made up of english-only mps. these ideas must now be considered as part of the constitutional convention process.englandwe will embark on the biggest devolution of power to our english city and county regions in a hundred years with an english devolution act. it will transfer 30 billion of funding to city and county regions, along with new powers over economic development, skills, employment, housing, and business support. this will include control over local transport systems so that in future, local bodies can integrate trains, buses, trams and cycling into a single network. we will enable city and county regions to retain 100 per cent of additional business rates raised from growth in their area.fair funding will be restored across england, alongside longer term multi-year budgets, so that local authorities can plan ahead on the basis of need in their area and protect vital services. and an english regional cabinet committee, chaired by the prime minister, will be convened regularly, attended by the relevant secretaries of state and leaders of our major city and county regions.in return for greater devolution of funding and responsibility, we will establish local public accounts committees, so that every pound spent by local bodies creates value for money for local taxpayers.devolution does not end at town halls. local people know best about the complex problems they face, and they are best placed to work out how to solve them.the english new deal begins the process of giving individuals and communities more power and control over how they are governed and over the design of
their public services. it will support people who need care to live independently, help troubled families to turn their lives around, and make sure that every child has a good start in life with early-years intervention and quality childcare.we will give english people a stronger voice in shaping the future of their local nhs services. patients and the public will have a seat at the table from the very start of any process that draws up plans for change, including changes to hospital services.we will give local communities more power to shape their high streets, and so preserve their local identities. councils will be given the power to require particular types of shops to apply for planning permission, allowing them to restrict the number of payday lenders or other shops that are clustering on a single high street. communities will be able to review betting shop licenses in their area and reduce the number of fixed-odds betting terminals in existing betting shops  or ban them entirely  in response to local concerns.scotlandin september 2014, people across scotland voted overwhelmingly for change. labour will keep its vow and implement the smith agreement in full. and we will go further, with a home rule bill to give extra powers to scotland over tax, welfare and jobs. rates of income tax will be set in scotland. billions of pounds of social security spending will be devolved, including benefits that support disabled people. the work programme will also be devolved along with a greater ability to invest in capital projects.the new devolution settlement will recognise the strength and security offered by being part of the united kingdom. we will maintain the barnett formula, and scotland will continue to benefit from pooling and sharing resources across the uk.the labour party manifesto 2015 65
66reforming government to give more power to peoplewaleslabour will put welsh devolution on the same statutory basis as scottish devolution, with a clear principle that powers are devolved unless specifically reserved, and that a welsh legislature is a permanent feature of our constitutional arrangements. we will take forward proposals from the silk commission to extend the power the people of wales have over their elections, transport and energy. an all-wales policing plan will give the welsh people the ability to shape local policing in wales.wales must not be unfairly disadvantaged by the barnett formula. so while the conservatives have cut the welsh budget by 1.5 billion, we will establish a fair funding settlement for wales, with the guarantee of a funding floor.northern irelandlabour is proud of the role we played in bringing peace and stability to northern ireland through the good friday agreement, and successive agreements. a labour government will engage proactively with the northern ireland executive to support continued political progress, and deliver on its vision of a shared future. we will ensure the economic pact between the uk government and northern ireland executive is focused on stimulating jobs and growth which contribute to reducing unemployment and poverty in northern ireland. we will continue to work with the irish government to secure peace in northern ireland and strengthen relations between our two countries.rights and equalitythe labour party has always led on challenging prejudice and discrimination and we will continue to do so. people's differences are not excuses to treat them badly or unjustly.
the next labour government will go further in reducing discrimination against women, requiring large companies to publish their gender pay gap and strengthening the law against maternity discrimination. where there is evidence more progress is needed, we will enforce the relevant provisions within the equality act.we want our parliament to look more like britain. we are proud of our record in strengthening the representation of women, ethnic minorities, and other under-represented groups in politics and public life. we remain committed to achieving a better balance in parliament, including through the use of all- women shortlists in labour party parliamentary selection contests.we will establish a comprehensive race equality strategy to break down the barriers still faced by black and minority ethnic communities. our aim is to make sure our national institutions, including parliament, the police, judiciary, civil service, and the boardrooms of our companies, are more representative of our diverse country.we will also build on our history of championing lgbt rights, tackling homophobia with tougher laws at home and greater engagement abroad.britain has a long tradition of liberty and the rule of law, and labour has a proud record of extending these to our most vulnerable citizens, by promoting equality and opportunity for all.thanks to the human rights act, some of our most vulnerable citizens, including disabled people and victims of crime, have been given a powerful means of redress. the conservatives want to leave the european convention of human rights, and abolish the human rights act. a labour government will stand up for citizens individual rights, protecting the human rights act and reforming, rather than walking away from, the european court of human rights. and we will make sure that access to legal representation, a cornerstone of our democracy, is not determined by personal wealth, but remains available to those that need it.the labour party manifesto 2015 67
68reforming government to give more power to peopleour freedom of information laws have shone a light into the darker corners of government and are a crucial check on the power of the executive. we will extend their scope so that public services run by large private companies are included. and we will repair the damage done by this government to the vital safeguard offered by judicial review.the mediathe free flow of information and of different points of view is crucial for open debate and countering concentrations of unaccountable power. that is why the concentration of media power in too few hands is damaging to our democracy. no one media owner should be able to exert undue influence on public opinion and policy makers. no media company should have so much power that those who run it believe themselves above the rule of law.yet the current system for protecting against these threats is inadequate. labour will take steps to protect the principle of media plurality, so that no media outlet can get too big, including updating our rules for the 21st century media environment.we remain strongly committed to the implementation of the recommendations of the leveson inquiry. we expect the industry to establish a mechanism for independent self-regulation, which delivers proper redress for individuals, as set out in the royal charter, and agreed by all parties in parliament. we made a promise to victims of the phone hacking scandal. we stand by that promise and will keep it.our system of public service broadcasting is one of britains great strengths. the bbc makes a vital contribution to the richness of our cultural life, and we will ensure that it continues to do so while delivering value for money. we will also commit to keeping channel 4 in public ownership, so it continues to produce vital public content.
labour will:set up a people-led constitutional convention to determine the future of uks governancereplace the house of lords with a senate of the nations and regionspass an english devolution act, handing 30 billion of resources and powers to our great english city and county regionsgive new powers for communities to shape their high streets, including power over payday lenders and the number of fixed-odds betting terminalsmeet our promises to devolve further powers to scotland and wales give 16 and 17-year-olds the votecreate a statutory register of lobbyistsban mps from holding paid directorships and consultanciesrequire large companies to publish their gender pay gap implement the recommendations of the leveson inquiry.the labour party manifesto 2015 69
70 the labour party manifesto 2015amanda and nawfal, with their son adam
the labour party manifesto 2015 71
72stephen, head of operations and maintenance
we will stand up for britains interests in europeand the world
74standing up for britains interests in europe and the worldwe live in turbulent times. the rise of isil, an aggressive russia threatening its neighbours in eastern europe, and continuing economic uncertainty in the eurozone, are each a challenge to our national security. labour is an internationalist party and believes britain must engage with the global challenges we face, but not try and solve them on our own. we believe the conservatives are damaging the interests of our country by turning their backs on europe, and isolating us abroad. we will strengthen our national security, stand up for human rights, and work with other countries to tackle terrorism, climate change, and eliminate extreme poverty globally.britain has a unique influence in the world. we are the only country that is a member of the un security council, nato, the g7, the g20, the commonwealth and the eu.with labour, britains response to threats to our security will be based on enduring principles. we will protect our national interests, and strengthen our long-standing international alliances, in particular, our membership of nato and the european union. we will advance our international engagement, rather than retreating into isolation. we will maintain the best armed forces in the world, capable of responding to changing threats in an unpredictable security landscape. and we will support human rights, always putting individual freedom and democracy at the heart of our foreign policy.one of our first acts in government will be to conduct a wide-ranging review of britains place in the world and how we can best uphold our values and the national interest.global challengeswe will take a multilateral approach to global challenges. we will continue to uphold our key alliances. these include the united states, our allies in africa and latin america, and our partners from across the commonwealth. they
also include the european union. the crisis in ukraine over the past year has demonstrated the importance of nato and the eu standing up to external threats in europes eastern, and southern neighbourhoods. labour will continue to advocate an eu which looks outward to promote stability, peace and prosperity on its borders.most immediately we will work with our allies to counter and confront terrorism. isils barbarism and expansionist ideology, alongside terrorist groups such as al qaeda and al-shabaab, represent a particular threat to global security. following a request from the iraqi prime minister, it was right that the uk joined other nations in air strikes against isil targets in iraq. but military action alone will not defeat isil. a long-term multinational political strategy, with regional actors playing a central role, is essential for tackling the rise of extremism across the region.a labour government will always do what is necessary to defend our country. beyond self-defence, labour has been clear about the need to learn the lessons of previous interventions, especially the 2003 invasion of iraq. we will continue the approach we have taken in this parliament. a labour government would not propose the use of military force without judging whether reasonable diplomatic efforts have been exhausted, the action is proportionate and in partnership with allies, whether there is a clear legal basis, and if there is a clear plan, not just for winning the war but also for building a lasting peace.peace and security in the middle east are one of labours most important foreign policy objectives. we remain committed to a comprehensive two-state solution  a secure israel alongside a viable and independent state of palestine. there can be no military solution to this conflict and all sides must avoid taking action that would make peace harder to achieve. labour will continue to press for an immediate return to meaningful negotiations leading to a diplomatic resolution.labour will also continue to honour the uks commitment to support afghanistan as it seeks to secure an inclusive and durable political settlement. in december 2014, the nato-led isaf mission in afghanistan ended. we can never repay the debt owed to the brave servicemen and women who havethe labour party manifesto 2015 75
76standing up for britains interests in europe and the worldsacrificed and risked their lives in afghanistan to protect our national security.as power and wealth continues to shift from west to east, our relationship with asia will be fundamental to our long-term prosperity. labour will set up an asia step-change taskforce to ensure a more strategic and effective dialogue with regional partners, including china, both in the commerical realm, and in other areas, from cultural exchange to human rights.this commitment to universal human rights will be at the heart of our foreign policy across the world. we will continue to promote womens rights. we will join with those campaigning to attain gender equality, the eradication of poverty and inclusive economic growth. we will appoint a global envoy for religious freedom, and establish a multi-faith advisory council on religious freedom within the foreign and commonwealth office. and we will appoint an international lgbt rights envoy to promote respect for the human rights of lgbt people, and work towards the decriminalisation of homosexuality worldwide.europelabour believes that our membership of the european union is central to our prosperity and security. it is why we will work to change the eu, so that it operates in the best interests of our country. and it is why we will re-engage with our european allies to protect our national interest after five years of britain being sidelined in europe and isolated abroad.the economic case for membership of the eu is overwhelming. over 3 million jobs in the uk are linked to trade with the european union, and almost half of our trade and foreign investment comes from the eu. competing in the single market, with the best companies in the world, drives competitiveness and innovation for firms in all parts of our economy. and it helps boost the living standards of people across britain, encouraging the inflow of capital and investment.
our reforms will help deliver a europe focused on jobs and growth, not simply more austerity and rising unemployment. labour will focus on the completion of the single market and tougher budget discipline, including on those items where spending at the eu level can save money at the national level. that means driving reform of the common agricultural policy and a commission-led zero-based review of spending on eu agencies to reduce waste and inefficiency. we will not join the euro, and we will ensure eu rules protect the interests of non-euro members.a labour government helped to introduce sensible measures at eu level to protect the rights of british workers, and we remain committed to fighting to protect these measures.people coming to britain from the eu to look for work are expected to contribute to our economy, and to our society. so we will secure reforms to immigration and social security rules, as well as pushing for stronger transitional controls, which will enable member states to manage the flow of workers for longer when new countries join.we will also continue to open up eu decision-making, and implement institutional reforms to help build levels of trust among european citizens. we will work to strengthen the influence national parliaments over european legislation, by arguing for a red-card mechanism for member states, providing greater parliamentary scrutiny.labours priority in government will be protecting the nhs and tackling the cost-of-living crisis. it is not to take britain out of europe. however, labour will legislate for a lock that guarantees that there can be no transfer of powers from britain to the european union without the consent of the british public through an in/out referendum.defence and our armed forcesthe primary duty of any government is the defence of the nation and its interests. that is why labour is committed to ensuring the uk has responsive, high-tech armed forces, with the capability to respond to emerging, interconnectedthe labour party manifesto 2015 77
78standing up for britains interests in europe and the worldthreats, in an unpredictable security landscape. we will conduct a strategic defence and security review in the first year of government, with an inclusive national debate on the security and defence challenges facing the country. it will be fiscally responsible and strategically driven, focusing on the obstacles that impede our armed forces from effective response to threats.at the heart of our defence policy are the service men and women, both regulars and reservists, who risk their lives for their country. labour will strengthen the covenant between our nation and our armed forces, veterans and their families. we will create a veterans register to make certain our veterans receive proper support on leaving service.we will continue to roll out labours veterans interview programme, in which companies voluntarily guarantee an interview for job-seeking ex-forces personnel. we will introduce legislation to make discrimination against members of our armed forces illegal, and we will enshrine the military covenant in the nhs constitution.the uk defence and security industry is a key contributor to our economy, with a turnover of 22 billion a year. we will work to secure defence jobs across the uk, protect the supply chain and support industry to grow britains defence exports. in partnership with industry, we will put accountability, value for money, interoperability and sustainability at the centre of defence procurement.britain needs to be prepared to counter the threat of cyber-attacks. we have already called on the government to require every company working with the ministry of defence, regardless of its size or the scale of its work, to sign up to a cyber-security charter. this would reduce the risk of hackers using small suppliers to break into the systems of major defence companies or the department itself. we will consult on creating a statutory requirement for all private companies, to report serious cyber-attacks threatening our national infrastructure.labour remains committed to a minimum, credible, independent nuclear capability, delivered through a continuous at-sea deterrent. we will actively work to increase momentum on global multilateral disarmament efforts and
negotiations, and look at further reductions in global stockpiles and the numbers of weapons.climate changewe will put climate change at the heart of our foreign policy. as the terrible impact of the floods in britain showed last year, climate change is now an issue of national, as well as global security. from record droughts in california, to devastating typhoons in the philippines, the world is already seeing the effects we once thought only future generations would experience.the intergovernmental panel on climate change has made clear that if the world is going to hold warming below two degrees (the internationally- agreed goal), global emissions need to peak in around 2020, and then decline rapidly to reach net zero emissions by the second half of this century. the weaker the action now, the more rapid and costly the reductions will need to be later.the effects of climate change hit the poor, the hardest. if we do not tackle climate change, millions of people will fall into poverty. we will expand the role of the department of international development to mitigate the risks of a changing climate, and support sustainable livelihoods for the worlds poorest people.we want an ambitious agreement on climate change at the unfccc conference in paris, in december. we will make the case for ambitious emissions targets for all countries, strengthened every five years on the basis of a scientific assessment of the progress towards the below two degree goal. and we will push for a goal of net zero global emissions in the second half of this century, for transparent and universal rules for measuring, verifying and reporting emissions, and for an equitable deal in which richer countries provide support to poorer nations in combatting climate change.the labour party manifesto 2015 79
80standing up for britains interests in europe and the worldinternational developmentwe are proud that labour mps passed the historic law that commits britain to spend 0.7 per cent of our gross national income on international development. labour will use that commitment from the british public to transform the lives of the worlds poorest people, whilst ensuring value for taxpayers money. we will work in fragile and conflict-affected states to improve the lives of those affected by violence, prioritising the protection and education of women and children. we will rebalance the budget to focus funding on the worlds poorest countries.while progress has been made towards the millennium development goals, it is unacceptable that over a billion people still live on less than $1.25 a day. we will work with other countries at this years sustainable development goals summit to unite the world to eradicate extreme poverty, tackle growing economic inequality, and place human rights at the heart of development. we will establish a centre for universal health coverage to provide the support, encouragement, and global partnerships needed to help countries provide free healthcare. we will lead efforts to reshape the un humanitarian system to better equip it to save lives.the private sector is essential to long-term development, and is often a positive force for change. we will extend the sharing of tax information to developing countries, increase dfids help to governments to collect more of their own taxes, tackle corruption, and ensure good governance. we will work with companies to ensure they have sustainable supply chains that are free from slavery, treat their workers fairly, and pay taxes where they are due.
labour will:conduct a strategic defence and security review in the first year of governmentreturn britain to a leadership role in europe, but reform the eu so that it works for britainguarantee no powers will be transferred to brussels without an in/out referendumappoint an international lgbt rights envoy and a global envoy for religious freedomoutlaw discrimination against and abuse of members of the armed forces enshrine the military covenant in the nhs constitutionpush for global targets to tackle inequality and promote human rights establish a centre for universal health coveragepush for an ambitious target in paris to get to goal of net zero global emissions in the second half of this century.the labour party manifesto 2015 81
82maliha, freelance animator
time for changein this election the country has a choice.either we can carry on as we are, with an economy that might work for some in the city of london but shuts out millions of people in the rest of the country. a country in which young people are left facing a worse life than their parents and an nhs under huge strain faces a real threat to its future.or we can change direction, together, with labour.we don't promise the earth. all our commitments in this manifesto are fully funded, so they can be delivered without a penny of borrowing.but our policies will bring hope and make britain work for working people once again.working people want an economy with better jobs and higher skills. families want to know they are guaranteed decent schools and good healthcare. mothers and fathers want a better future for their children. individuals and communities in every part of our country want to have control over their lives and for those in power to be held to account. everyone, young and old, wants a sense of belonging and safety in their communities.we deserve a country where everyone plays by the same rules, including those at the top.that's what this manifesto offers. it is the kind of country we know we have it in ourselves to be. let's build it together.the labour party manifesto 2015 83
andy, dockerthe labour party manifesto 2015
6747_15 reproduced from electronic media, promoted by iain mcnicol, general secretary, the labour party, on behalf of the labour party, both at one brewers green, london sw1h 0rh.the conservative party manifesto 2015the conservative party manifesto 201 5the conservative party manifesto 2015contentsforeword by david cameron  leader of the conservative party 51. an economic plan to help you and your familya strong economy to help you and your family  7 better roads, trains and modern communications 142. jobs for alljobs for all  173. cutting your taxes, making welfare fairer and controlling immigrationcutting your taxes and building a fairer welfare system25 controlled immigration that benefits britain 294. the best schools and hospitals for you and your familygiving your child the best start in life33 protecting and improving our national health service37 enabling you to enjoy our heritage, creativity and sports  41 helping you build the big society45 making government work better for you475. securing your home and your neighbourhoodhelping you to buy a home of your own 51 protecting and enhancing our natural environment 54 guaranteeing you clean, affordable and secure energy supplies56 fighting crime and standing up for victims58 preventing terrorism, countering extremism616. dignity in your retirementdignity in your retirement657. keeping our country securestronger together: a union for the 21st century69 real change in our relationship with the european union  72 a britain standing tall in the world 75 a stronger voice for our nation on the world stage 76 keeping britain safe 77 tackling global challenges to make you safer and more prosperous  78conclusion 811the conservative party manifesto 2015we have a plan for every stage of your life:for the best start in lifewe will continue to increase spending on the nhs, provide 7-day a week access to your gp and deliver a truly 7-day nhs  so you know you will always have access to a free and high quality health service when you need it mostfor your school yearswe will maintain the amount of money that follows each child into school, ensure there is a good primary school place available for every child and lift the cap on university places  so you have the skills you need to succeedto secure your first jobwe will create 3 million new apprenticeships; take everyone earning less than 12,500 out of income tax altogether and pass a law to ensure we have a tax-free minimum wage in this country; and continue to create a fairer welfare system where benefits are capped to the level that makes work pay  so you are rewarded for working hard and doing the right thingas you raise your familywe will extend the right to buy to housing association tenants, build 200,000 new starter homes  20 per cent below the market price, for first-time buyers under 40  and provide 30 hours of free childcare to working parents of three and four year-olds  so you are able to work while having the security of your own home in which to raise your familywhile you grow olderwe will not raise vat, national insurance contributions or income tax but we will raise the 40p income tax threshold to 50,000 and take the family home out of tax by increasing the effective inheritance tax threshold for married couples and civil partners to 1 million  so you can keep more of your income and pass it on to future generationsand when you retirewe will continue to increase the basic state pension by at least 25 per cent through the triple lock, give you the freedom to use your pension savings as you want and pass them on tax-free and we will cap the amount you can be charged for your residential care  so you can have the dignity and security you deserve in your old agethe next conservative government will secure a better future for you, your family and britain.3the conservative party manifesto 2015forewordover the last five years, we have put our country back on the right track. five years ago, britain was on the brink. as the outgoing labour treasury minister put it with brutal candour, there is no money since then, we have turned things aroundbritain is now one of the fastest growing major economies in the world. we are getting our national finances back under control. we have halved our deficit as a share of our economy. more people are in work than ever before. britain is back on its feet, strong and growing stronger every daythis has not happened by accident. it is the result of difficult decisions and of patiently working through our long-term economic plan. above all, it is the product of a supreme national effort, in which everyone has made sacrifices and everyone has played their partit is a profound conservative belief that our country is made great not through the action of government alone, but through the flair, the ingenuity and hard work of the british people  and so it has proved the last five years.we can be proud of what we have achieved so far together, and especially proud that as we have taken hard decisions on public spending, we have protected the national health service, with 9,500 more doctors and 6,900 more nurses, and ensured generous rises in the state pensionour friends and competitors overseas look at britain, and they see a country that is putting its own house in order, a country on the rise they see a country that believes in itself but our national recovery remains a work in progress it is fragile, and with the wrong decisions, it could easily be reversedso the central questions at this election are these: how do we maintain our economic recovery, upon which our ambitions for our country depend? and how do we make sure that the recovery benefits every one of our citizens, at every stage of their lives?this manifesto sets out our plan to do just that it is a plan for a better future  for you, for your family it is a plan forevery stage of your life for your new-born baby, there will be the world's best medical care for your child, there will be a place at an excellent school. as you look for your first job, we are building a healthy economy that provides a good career for you with a decent income. as you look for that first home, we will make sure the government is there to help. as you raise your family, we will help you with childcare and as you grow older, we will ensure that you have dignity in retirement throughout, we will make sure that if you or your family fall ill, you will always be able to depend on our cherished national health service to give you the care you needand in an increasingly dangerous and uncertain world, we will fulfil the most basic duty of government  to defend our country and keep it safebut all of these things depend on a strong and growing economy so as you consider how to vote, i hope you will ask this: which party is best placed to keep our economy strong? the team which has delivered the growing economy we have today, which created more jobs since 2010 than the rest of the european union put together; or the party which left behind a ruined economy just five short years ago?now is a time to build on the progress we have made, not to put it all at risk this manifesto is our plan of action  our plan to take our amazing country forward. above all, it is a plan for you.i hope you will give it your support, so that together, we can see through the task we have begun5the conservative party manifesto 20156 securing a better future for you, your family and britainthe conservative party manifesto 2015a strong economy to help you and your familyour commitment to you:your job, your home, the mortgage you pay, the school your children go to, your local hospital, your pension  all these things depend on a strong economy. so we will carry on working through our long-term economic plan. we will:keep our economy secure by running a surplus so that we start paying down our debts increase the tax-free personal allowance to 12,500 and the 40p income tax threshold to50,000commit to no increases in vat, national insurance contributions or income taxcrack down on tax evasion and aggressive tax avoidance and ensure those who can afford to pay the most dorebalance our economy, build a northern powerhouse and back elected metro mayors pursue our ambition to become the most prosperous major economy in the world by the 2030s.our long-term economic plan is turning around britains economy five years ago, britain was reeling from the chaos of labours great recession; in 2014 we were the fastest growing of all the major advanced economies  last year, we grew 75 per cent faster than germany, three times faster than the eurozone and seven times faster than france. five years ago, the budget deficit was more than 10 per cent of gdp, the highest in our peacetime history, and the national debt was rising out of control; today, the deficit is half that level and debt as a share of national income will start falling this financial year.the fastest growing of all the major advanced economies in 2014industries are coming back to life companies are striding into new markets manufacturers are returning to our shores more tech companies are starting up here than anywhere else in europe we have overtaken france as the third largest car producer in europe and there are 760,000 more businesses than in 2010 providing jobs and creating wealth across the countrythe great recession has given way to a great revival, which is creating on average 1,000 new jobs every day: more than the rest of the european union combined this is no accident it is the product of hard work by people in every part of the country and it is thanks tothe success of our long-term economic plan by halving the deficit, we have helped to restore confidence to the economy. by maintaining fiscal discipline, we have helped keep mortgage rates lower than they otherwise would be and by establishing the independent office for budget responsibility (obr), we have ended  permanently  the ability of politicians to cook the books for political gainat the nations expense. with inflation at a record low, the latest obr forecasts show that living standards will be higher in 2015 than in 2010, and are set to grow strongly every year for the rest of the decade, with the average family 900 better off. it is only by securing the recovery, dealing with our debts and creating jobs that we can continue to raise living standards that means sticking to our long-term economic plan; britain is on the right pathbut the job is not finished. there are clouds on the international horizon. huge challenges remain at home. we have cut the record deficit we inherited to five per cent of gdp, but that is still too high our trade with emerging economies is up, with exports to china more than doubled since 2009, but overall we are still tooan economic plan to help you and your family71. an economic plan to help you and your familydependent on slow-growing european markets business investment is rising, but we still underinvest compared to other countries productivity remains too low and while prosperity is now spreading around the country, our economic growth remains uneven, too reliant on financial services.1,000 jobs created for every day of the parliament since 2010we will finish the job we started in a balanced way. those with the broadest shoulders have contributed the mostto deficit reduction  which is why inequality has fallen, and child and pensioner poverty are down  and they will continue to do so we will increase nhs spending every year. we will control spending, eliminate the deficit, and start to run a surplus we will go from stuck in the red, to back in the black by building on the foundations we have put in place, we will have a truly national recovery and be able to pursue our ambition for britain to become the most prosperous major economy in the world by the 2030sif we do not stick to our long-term economic plan, we will slip back again, reversing the progress we have made in the last five years. more borrowing  and the extra debt interest that it brings  means there is less moneyto spend on schools and hospitals more spendingmeans higher taxes for hardworking people, and interest rates that are higher than they otherwise would be  punishing homeowners, hurting businesses, costing jobsa strong economy allows us to invest in and protect our public services like the nhs and schoolsand failing to control our debt would be more than an economic failing; it would be a moral failing  leaving our children and grandchildren with debts that they could never hope to repayso you face a clear choice economic competence, with david cameron as prime minister, following throughon our long-term economic plan or economic chaos under labour, with higher taxes, more debt and no plan to fix our public finances, create jobs or build a more secure economyour plan of action:we will finish the job by eliminating the deficit to keep our economy secure and keep your taxes and mortgage payments downour long-term economic plan reflects our values: we as a nation should not be piling up and passing on unaffordable levels of debt to the next generation we will eliminate the deficit in a sensible and balanced way that will enable us to continue to increase spending on the nhs and cut income tax for 30 million working peopleour deficit reduction plan has two phases. the first will see us continue to reduce government spending by one per cent each year in real terms for the first two full financial years of the next parliament, the same rate as over the last five years. that means saving 1 a yearin every 100 that government spends we dont think theres a business that couldnt do that  and we dont think government, when it is spending your money, should be any different.we have halved the deficit as a share of our economythat will require a further 30 billion in fiscal consolidation over the next two years, on top of the 120 billion that we have already identified and delivered over this parliament. we will find 13 billion from departmental savings, the same rate of reduction as in this parliament. we will find 12 billion from welfare savings, on top of the 21 billion of savings delivered in this parliament and we will raise at least 5 billion from continuing to tackle tax evasion, and aggressive tax avoidance and tax planning, buildingon the 7 billion of annual savings we have delivered in this parliament this 30 billion of further consolidation is necessary to ensure that debt keeps falling as a share of gdp and to deliver a balancedthe conservative party manifesto 20158the conservative party manifesto 2015structural current budget in 2017-18, meeting the new fiscal mandate that parliament voted on earlier this year.our commitment goes further than this a balanced current budget is not enough to deliver a reliable reduction in our level of national debt, which remains far too high in a world of continuing economic challenges international evidence and treasury analysis shows that the only way to keep our economy securefor the future is to eliminate the deficit entirely and start running a surplus anything less would be to ignore the lessons of the pastthat is why, in the second phase of our deficit reduction plan starting in 2018-19, we are set to move into surplus, with the government taking in more than it is spending for the first time in 18 years. that means we can start properly paying down our debts and reducing the scale of annual interest payments  reducing the uks vulnerability to future shocks by fixing the roof while the sun is shining. we will achieve this by continuing to control government spending in 2018-19, no longer cutting it in real terms, but instead growing it in line with inflation.to eliminate the deficit we must continue to cut out wasteful spending and make government more efficient, effective and accountablefrom 2019-20, after a surplus has been achieved, spending will grow in line with gdp a new fundamental principle of fiscal policy, monitored by the independent obr, will ensure that in normal economic times, when the economy is growing, the government will always run a surplus in order to reduce our national debt and keep our economy secure, with a state neither smaller than we need nor bigger than we can afford. total government spending as a share of our national income at the end of the next parliament is forecast to be very slightly higher than in the year 2000, the year before labour lost all control of spending and the national debt started its longest rise for hundreds of yearsour approach is focused on reducing wasteful spending,making savings in welfare, and continuing to crack down on tax evasion and aggressive avoidance this means that we can commit to no increases in vat, income tax or national insurance tax rises on working people would harm our economy, reduce living standards and cost jobs. instead, as we reduce the deficit, we will cut income tax, as we have done over the last five years: during the next parliament, we will increase the tax-free personal allowance to 12,500 and the higher rate threshold to 50,000, so you keep more of your hard-earned moneythe richest are paying a greater share of income tax than in any of labours 13 yearswe will continue to build a stronger, safer and more secure banking system that serves its customers and provides businesses with the finance they need to grow and create jobswe will make sure our financial services industry is the best regulated in the world with our new system of supervision led by the independent bank of england our new financial policy committee will monitor and control the growth of indebtedness and imbalances across the whole economy  a vital task that was totally ignored in the run up to the financial crisis. our tough new financial conduct authority will protect consumers and ensure that financial markets work for the benefit of the whole economy to protect hardworking taxpayers from future banking crashes, we will finish the process of ring- fencing banks high street branches from their investment arms by 2019 at the latest in order to ensure that new pay structures for bankers rebuild trust and reduce short- termism, we will ensure that britain continues to have the toughest regime of bonus deferral and clawback of any financial centre. we will continue to sell the governments stakes in the bailed-out banks and building societiesin order to deliver value for money for taxpayers and support the economy hardworking taxpayers supported the banks during the financial crisis and so the banks should in turn support them during the recovery  thatis why we will keep the bank levy in place and restrict established banks ability to pay less tax by offsetting their profits against past losses.an economic plan to help you and your family91. an economic plan to help you and your familythe conservative party manifesto 201510 securing a better future for you, your family and britainthe conservative party manifesto 2015we will make the banks work for youour plan is to ensure banks help secure our recovery and back businesses to create jobs and growth in our economy we capped payday lenders, made it easier for you to switch your bank account and will continue to support the credit union movement in making financial services more accessible. we will continue the successful funding for lending scheme into 2016 we will help new and existing challenger banks to inject fresh competition into the market for personal current accounts, mortgages and business loans, including through the british business bank, while backing the financial technology revolution. we will improve our support for investment into start-ups and roll-out our innovative help to grow scheme, which will plug a 1 billion finance gap for firms that are looking to expand, invest and take on new employeeswe will continue to lead the world on tax and transparencytackling tax evasion and aggressive tax avoidance and tax planning is an important part of our long-term economic plan we will increase the annual tax charges paid by those with non-domiciled status, ensuring that they make a fair contribution to reducing the deficit, and continue to tackle abuses of this status we will lead international efforts to ensure global companies pay their fair share in tax, as david cameron did at the g8 summit in northern ireland in 2013, which secured significant international progress on fairertax rules and full transparency over who really owns companies we will push for all countries to sign upto the extractive industries transparency initiative; review the implementation of the new international country-by-country tax reporting rules and consider the case for making this information publicly available on a multilateral basis we will ensure developing countries have full access to global automatic tax information exchange systems and continue to build the capacityof tax authorities in developing countries we are also making it a crime if companies fail to put in place measures to stop economic crime, such as tax evasion, inwe are fixing the economy so that everyone feels the benefittheir organisations and making sure that the penalties are large enough to punish and deterwe will rebalance our economy and build a northern powerhousewe are committed to a truly national recovery, benefiting all parts of our country we have devolved powers to scotland and wales, and set out long-term economic plans to raisethe growth rate of all parts of england, bringing areas which have grown more slowly up to at least the national average over the last year, the north grew faster than the south by connecting up the north with modern transport links, we will enable its great cities and towns to pool their strengths we will invest a record 13 billion in transport for the north we will electrify the main rail routes, build the northern hub, and provide new trains for the north we will upgrade the a1, m62, m1 and a555 link road and that is on top of our 50 billion commitment to build high speed 2  the new north-south railway linking up london with the west midlands, leeds and manchester  and develop high speed 3 to join up the north. we will back scientific and technical strengths by creating new institutions such as health north; the royce institute for advanced materials in manchester, leeds, liverpool and sheffield; the national centre for ageing science and innovation in newcastle; the cognitive computing centre at daresbury; and by making investments in energy research in blackpool, cumbria and thorntonwe will back new jobs in the south westto help attract growth and new businesses we will improve connections to the south west with major investment in the m5, a358, a30 and a303, andthe electrification of the great western main line  bringing new fast trains on the route we will invest to boost tourism in the south west and ensure the world- class defence assets and cyber-security industries of the south west benefit the local economy.britain's exports are growing fastest in the north east and our employment fastest in the north westan economic plan to help you and your family111. an economic plan to help you and your familythe conservative party manifesto 201512 securing a better future for you, your family and britainthe conservative party manifesto 2015we will make the midlands an engine of growthwe will back business by investing a record 52 billion in better transport, upgrading the m1 and m6, and electrifying the midland main line from st pancrasto sheffield  putting the midlands at the centre ofa modern, inter-connected transport network for the uk we will back the midlands strength in advanced manufacturing, engineering and science with major projects such as the energy research accelerator and support for innovation in the motor industrywe will properly connect the east of england and back innovationwe will improve rail connections to east anglia, delivering norwich in 90 minutes and ipswich in 60 minutes and upgrade key roads like the a11 and a47 we will support the creation of new jobs by backing the easts great strengths  agri-tech, high-tech businesses around cambridge, and energy businesses at great yarmouth and lowestoftwe support policies that grow the economy as a whole, generating new jobs and higher wages for everybodywe will devolve powers and budgets to boost local growth in englandwe will devolve far-reaching powers over economic development, transport and social care to large cities which choose to have elected mayors we will legislate to deliver the historic deal for greater manchester, which will devolve powers and budgets and lead to the creation of a directly elected mayor for greater manchester in cambridgeshire, greater manchester and cheshire east, we will pilot allowing local councils to retain 100 per cent of growthin business rates, so they reap the benefit of decisions that boost growth locally we will devolve further powers over skills spending and planning to the mayor of londonand we will deliver more bespoke growth deals withlocal councils, where locally supported, and back local enterprise partnerships to promote jobs and growthan economic plan to help you and your family131. an economic plan to help you and your familythe conservative party manifesto 2015better roads, trains and modern communicationsour commitment to you:you depend on infrastructure at every stage of your life: to go to school, to go to work, to enable businesses to grow and create jobs for your children and grandchildren. we have a plan of action that will improve our roads, railways, airports and internet connections. we will:invest in infrastructure to attract businesses and good jobs across the whole of the ukmake your life easier, with more and faster trains, more roads and cycle routeskeep commuter rail fares frozen in real terms for the whole of the next parliamentroll out universal broadband and better mobile phone connections, to ensure everyone is part of the digital economy.under labour, road and rail were starved of resources, while too many people were stuck on the wrong side of the digital divide this meant packed trains, potholes, patchy broadband coverage  businesses held back and cities left behind turning these problems around takes timeimproving our trains, roads and broadband helps local businesses grow and create more jobs and opportunitiesbut because we have made savings elsewhere, wehave been able to make significant investments in infrastructure we will commit, alongside running a surplus, to increase our capital spending  investment in infrastructure  at least in line with our national income we have set out a plan to invest over 100 billion in our infrastructure over the next parliamentthis will fund the biggest investment in rail since victorian times, and the most extensive improvements to our roads since the 1970s and it will give us thewe are investing over 2 billion electrifying our railwaysmost comprehensive and cheapest superfast broadband coverage of any major european countryour plan of action:we will spend more on infrastructure, to improve your quality of lifeoverall public investment will be higher on average over this decade, as a percentage of gdp, than under the whole period of the last labour government we will deliver on our national infrastructure plan and respond to the airports commissions final report.we will transform our railway networkwe will invest 38 billion in our railway network in the five years to 2019. electrification of the railways is a key part of our investment programme, with work already underway across the north, the midlands, and south wales; thereare plans to go further in the rest of the country, including east anglia and the south west in addition to rolling out our national high-speed rail network, with high speed 2 and high speed 3, we will complete the construction of the new east-west crossrail across greater london, and push forward with plans for crossrail 2, a new rail route running through london and connecting surrey and hertfordshire we will support a fairer deal for taxpayers and commuters: we will keep commuter rail fares frozen in real terms for the whole of the next parliament  regulated fares will only be14able to rise by retail price inflation, and train operating companies will not have any flexibility to raise ticket prices above this we will also introduce smart ticketing and part- time season tickets and require train companies to improve compensation arrangements for passengers when trains are more than a few minutes late we are investing millions of pounds in fitting out trains with new wi-fi equipment and improving mobile phone signals, which will benefit passengers on trains across england and waleswe will support motorists and invest in our roads, to save you time and moneywe abolished labours fuel duty escalator, and instead have frozen fuel duty, delivering the longest duty freeze in 20 years we will invest 15 billion in roads this will include over 6 billion in the northern road network, with the dualling and widening of the a1 north of newcastle and the first new trans-pennine road capacity in over 40 years we will take action to tackle some of the most notorious and longstanding problems on our road network, including improvements to the a303, a47 and a27 we will add 1,300 extra lane miles to our roads, improve over 60 problem junctions, and continue to provide enough funding to fix around 18 million potholes nationwide between 2015 and 2021we will make motoring greener and promote cycling, to protect your environmentour aim is for almost every car and van to be a zero emission vehicle by 2050  and we will invest 500 million over the next five years to achieve it. we wantto double the number of journeys made by bicycle and will invest over 200 million to make cycling safer, so we reduce the number of cyclists and other road users killed or injured on our roads every yearwe are investing 790 million extending superfast broadband to rural areas  with 2 million uk premises already connected and 40,000 being upgraded every weekwe will deliver faster internet, to help you work and communicate more easilywe will secure the delivery of superfast broadband in urban and rural areas to provide coverage to 95 per cent of the uk by the end of 2017, and we will ensure no one is left behind by subsidising the cost of installing superfast capable satellite services in the very hardest to reach areas we will also release more spectrum from public sector use to allow greater private sector access and we have set an ambition that ultrafast broadband should be available to nearly all uk premises as soon as practicablewe will boost mobile coverage, so you can stay connectedwe will hold the mobile operators to their new legally binding agreement to ensure that 90 per cent of the uk landmass will have voice and sms coverage by 2017 we will continue to invest in mobile infrastructure to deliver coverage for voice calls and text messages forthe final 0.3  0.4 per cent of uk premises that do not currently have it. we will ensure that britain seizes the chance to be a world leader in the development of 5g, playing a key role in defining industry standards.the conservative party manifesto 2015an economic plan to help you and your family151. an economic plan to help you and your familythe conservative party manifesto 201516 securing a better future for you, your family and britainthe conservative party manifesto 2015jobs for allour commitment to you:whatever stage of life you are at  whether youre looking for your first job out of school, or coming to the end of your career  we will work to help you enjoy the satisfaction and rewards of a decent job. we will:help businesses to create two million new jobs, so we achieve full employmentgive businesses the most competitive taxes of any major economyback small firms with a major business rates reviewsupport three million new apprenticeships, so young people acquire the skills to succeedif you want to live in the most vibrant and dynamic country in the world, this election matters only the conservatives have the vision, the optimism, the ambition and the discipline to transform britain thats because we know that a decent job is the best weapon against poverty and the best way to provide security for familiesbritain has created more jobs than the rest of the eu put together since 2010thanks to the success of our long-term economic plan, britain is creating more jobs than the 27 other countries of the european union put together that means more people with the security of a regular pay packet over the past five years, 1.9 million new jobs have been created; 1,000 jobs for every single day that we have been in governmentthis represents a transformation in many peoples lives; giving families more security; boosting the self- esteem of young people taken on; and providing hope for those who have been unemployed for yearsbut we need to go further we have set out the bold aim of achieving full employment, with the highest employment rate of any major economy we want britain to be the best place in the world to start a business and will create another two million jobs overthe next parliament we will abolish long-term youth unemployment, and make sure that all young people are either earning or learning and we will make our economy more inclusive, by removing barriers that stop women and disabled people from participating in our workforcea job is the best way to provide security for familiesto achieve this, we will back british businesses: cutting red tape, lowering taxes on jobs and enterprise, getting young people into work, boosting apprenticeshipsand investing in science and technology with the conservatives, britain will be the best place in europeto innovate, patent new ideas and set up and expand a business we aim to be number one in europe and in the top five worldwide in the world banks doing business rankings by 2020 and to lead europe in attracting foreign investmentbacking business also means helping our farmers andour rural communities neglected for 13 years under labour, we have started the process of championing and connecting up the countryside in the coming years, we will go further, helping our farmers, supporting british food around the world and opening up new export marketsjobs for all172. jobs for allthis is all at risk if the labour party forms the government their policies to spend more, borrow more and tax more would be catastrophic for britains businesses  and for all the families thrown back into the despair of joblessness and financial uncertainty.our plan will help to generate jobs and higher wages for everybodyour plan of action:we will boost apprenticeships and help you secure a good jobwe have already delivered 22 million new apprenticeships over the last five years. over the next five years, we will deliver three million more and ensure they deliver the skills employers need we aim to achieve full employment inthe uk, with the highest employment rate in the g7, and we will help businesses create two million jobs over the parliament we have abolished the jobs tax  employers' national insurance contributions (nics)  for the under 21s and next year we will do the same for young apprentices under 25 we will continue to help smaller businesses take on new workers through the employment allowance, which frees businesses from the first 2,000 of employers nics so that a third of employers pay no jobs taxwe will support business to keep creating 1,000 jobs a day over the next five yearswe will aim to abolish long-term youth unemploymentour economic plan has helped deliver sharp falls in long- term youth unemployment, taking the numbers of 1618 year-olds not in education, employment or training to historic lows we will provide support to those 16 17 year- olds still not in education, employment or training and tothose who risk becoming so jobcentre plus advisers will work with schools and colleges to supplement careers advice and provide routes into work experience and apprenticeships but it is not fair  on taxpayers, or on young people themselves that 18-21 year-olds with no work experience should slip straight into a life on benefits without first contributing to their community so we will introduce tougher day one work requirements for young people claiming out-of-work benefits. we will replace the jobseekers allowance for 18-21 year-olds with a youth allowance that will be time-limited to six months, after which young people will have to take an apprenticeship, a traineeship or do daily community work for their benefits. it is also not fair that taxpayers should have to pay for 18-21 year-olds on jobseekers allowance to claim housing benefit in order to leave home. so we will ensure that they no longer have an automatic entitlement to housing benefit.we will reward entrepreneurshipto support jobs, we cut corporation tax from 28 to 20 per cent over the course of the parliament, reduced national insurance bills and capped the rise in business rates we have extended 100 per cent small business rate reliefand are providing extra support for high street shops by increasing the business rates retail discount to 1,500 in the next parliament, we want to maintain the most competitive business tax regime in the g20, and oppose labours plans to increase corporation tax we will conduct a major review into business rates by the end of 2015 to ensure that from 2017 they properly reflect the structure of our modern economy and provide clearer billing, better information sharing and a more efficient appeal systemwe will protect you from disruptive and undemocratic strike actionstrikes should only ever be the result of a clear, positive decision based on a ballot in which at least half the workforce has voted this turnout threshold will be an important and fair step to rebalance the interests of employers, employees, the public and the rights of trade unions we will, in addition, tackle the disproportionate impact of strikes in essential public services by introducing a tougher threshold in health, education, fire and transport. industrial action in these essential services would require the support of at least 40 per cent of all those entitledto take part in strike ballots  as well as a majority ofthe conservative party manifesto 201518the conservative party manifesto 2015britain has the most competitive business tax regime in the g20  and we want to keep it that waythose who actually turn out to vote we will also repeal nonsensical restrictions banning employers from hiring agency staff to provide essential cover during strikes; and ensure strikes cannot be called on the basis of ballots conducted years before we will tackle intimidation of non-striking workers; legislate to ensure trade unionsuse a transparent opt-in process for union subscriptions; tighten the rules around taxpayer-funded paid facility time for union representatives; and reform the role of the certification officer.we will cut red tape, boost start-ups and small businessesthis government was the first in post-war history to reduce the burden of regulation we will cut a further 10 billion of red tape over the next parliament through our red tape challenge and our one-in- two-out rule this will support our aim to make britain the best place in europe, and one of the top five worldwide, to do business by 2020 we will also treble our successful start up loans programme during the next parliament so that 75,000 entrepreneurs get the chance to borrow money to set up their own business we will raise the target for smes share of central government procurement to one-third, strengthenthe prompt payment code and ensure that all major government suppliers sign up we have already helped small businesses by increasing the annual investment allowance, reducing the burden of employment law through our successful tribunal reforms and supporting 27,000 new business mentors we will go further by establishing a new small business conciliation service to mediate in disputes, especially over late paymentthe gender pay gap is down to a record low  and there are more women on ftse 100 boards than ever beforethe creation of the office of tax simplification (ots) in 2010 has resulted in many improvements to the uk tax system we will establish the ots on a permanent basis and expand its role and capacity we will boost our support for first-time exporters and back the great campaign, so we achieve our goal of having 100,000 more uk companies exporting in 2020 than in 2010 and reach our target of 1 trillion in exports and we will set a new, significantly higher, permanent level for the annual investment allowancewe will fight for equal opportunitylast year alone, 140,000 disabled people found work but the jobless rate for this group remains too high and, as part of our objective to achieve full employment, we will aim to halve the disability employment gap: we will transform policy, practice and public attitudes, so that hundreds of thousands more disabled people who can and want to be in work find employment. we now have more women-led businesses than ever before, more women in work than ever before and more women on ftse 100 boards than ever before we want to see full, genuine gender equality the gender pay gap is the lowest on record, but we want to reduce it further and will push business to do so: wewill require companies with more than 250 employees to publish the difference between the average pay of their male and female employees under labour, womenour aim is to make britain the best place to do business in europeaccounted for only one in eight ftse 100 board members they represent a quarter of board members today and we want to see this rise further in the next parliament we also want to increase the proportion of public appointments going to women in the next parliament, as well as the number of female mpswe will back you at worknow that the economy is growing strongly again, we have seen the first real-terms increase in the national minimum wage since labours great recession began we strongly support the national minimum wage and want to see further real-terms increases in the next parliament wejobs for all192. jobs for allthe conservative party manifesto 201520 securing a better future for you, your family and britainaccept the recommendations of the low pay commission that the national minimum wage should rise to 670 this autumn, on course for a minimum wage that will be over 8 by the end of the decade we also support the living wage and will continue to encourage businesses and other organisations to pay it whenever they can afford it. we will also take further steps to eradicate abuses of workers, such as non-payment of the minimum wage, exclusivity in zero- hours contracts and exploitation of migrant workerswe will continue to invest in science, back our industrial strategies and make britain the technology centre of europegreat science is worthwhile in its own right and yields enormous practical benefits too  curing diseases, driving technological innovation, promoting business investment and informing public policy for the better we ring- fenced the science budget by making difficult choicesto reduce spending in other areas now we will investnew capital on a record scale  69 billion in the uks research infrastructure up to 2021  which will mean new equipment, new laboratories and new research institutes this long-term commitment includes 29 billion for a grand challenges fund, which will allow us to invest in major research facilities of national significance, such as the new alan turing institute, and projects such as the polar research ship and square kilometre array we have boosted research and development tax credits and we will continue to support our network of university enterprise zones, ensuring that britain's world-beating universities are able to make money from the technology they develop we will support our modern industrial strategies, such as our successful life sciences strategy, to help people compete and win in the intense global race for high value, high knowledge jobs we will work with the automotive council in support of our resurgent car industry and direct further resources towards the eight great technologies  among them robotics and nanotechnology  where britain is set to be a global leader we have delivered a network of catapult centres  r&d hubs in the technologies of the future  and we will create more to ensure that we have a bold andinequality is down from the record high it reached under labourcomprehensive offer in place for britains researchers and innovatorswe will support the rural economy and strengthen local communitieswe have the land, the technology, and the entrepreneurial flair to enable us to make the most of the economic potential of our rural areas we will provide rural britain with near universal superfast broadband by the end ofthe next parliament and secure the future of 3,000 rural post offices. we know how important it is to preserve vital community assets such as pubs, town halls and sports facilities, so we will strengthen the community right to bid that we created we will extend the length of time communities have to purchase these assets, and require owners to set a clear reserve price for the communityto aim for when bidding we will set up a pub loanfund to enable community groups to obtain small loans to pay for feasibility work, lawyers fees, or materials for refurbishment, where they have bid to run the pub as part of our reforms to the community asset registerwe will champion our farmers and food producerswe will set out a long-term vision for the future of british farming, working with industry to develop a 25 year planto grow more, buy more and sell more british food we will allow farmers to smooth their profits for tax purposes over five years, up from the current two years, to counter income volatility we will treble the number of apprenticeships in food, farming and agri-tech, as part of our plan to secure three million more apprenticeships we will support a science-led approach on gm crops and pesticides and implement our 25-year strategy to eradicate bovine tb we will liberate farmers from red tape by coordinating all visits through a single farm inspection taskforce, which will involve farmers themselves and use data from existing industry schemes, such as red tractor we will push for further reform of the eus common agricultural policy we will promote british food abroad by setting up a great british food unit to help trademark and promote local foods around the world and back british food at home,by guaranteeing that all central government departments purchase food to british standards of production by the end of the parliament we will also help consumers to buy british by pushing for country of origin labelling in europe, particularly for dairy products, following on fromthe conservative party manifesto 2015jobs for all212. jobs for allthe conservative party manifesto 201522 securing a better future for you, your family and britainour success with beef, lamb, pork and poultry and we will champion our new groceries code adjudicator, so farmers receive a fair deal from the supermarketswe will support our fishing and coastal communitieswe will defend our hard-won common fisheries policy reforms, which include ending the scandalous practice of discarding perfectly edible fish and reforming the quota system so that all at-risk species, including cod, plaice, haddock and seabass, will be fished sustainably by the end of the next parliament we will continue to devolve themanagement of north sea fisheries to local communities, and rebalance the uks inland water quotas to smaller, specific locally-based fishing communities.we will support countryside pursuitswe will protect hunting, shooting and fishing, for all the benefits to individuals, the environment and the rural economy that these activities bring a conservative government will give parliament the opportunity to repeal the hunting act on a free vote, with a government bill in government timethe conservative party manifesto 2015jobs for all232. jobs for allthe conservative party manifesto 201524 securing a better future for you, your family and britainthe conservative party manifesto 2015cutting your taxes and building a fairer welfare systemour commitment to you:our goal is a country that not only rewards those who work hard and do the right thing, but gives everyone  no matter their background  the chance to fulfil their potential. achieving this means seeing through our major reforms of tax and welfare. we will:cut income tax for 30 million people, taking everyone who earns less than 12,500 out of income tax altogetherpass a new law so that nobody working 30 hours on the minimum wage pays income tax on what they earnback aspiration by raising the 40p tax threshold  so that no one earning less than 50,000 pays itcap overall welfare spending, lower the amount of benefits that any household can receive to 23,000 and continue to roll out universal credit, to make work paybring in tax-free childcare to support parents back into work, and give working parents of 3 and 4-year-olds 30 hours of free childcare a week.under labour, those who worked hard found more and more of their earnings taken away in tax to supporta welfare system that allowed, and even encouraged, people to choose benefits when they could be earning a living this sent out terrible signals: if you did the right thing, you were penalised  and if you did the wrong thing, you were rewarded, with the unfairness of it all infuriating hardworking peoplewe have cut income tax for over 26 million people  and taken over 3 million people out of income tax altogetherover the last five years, we have cut peoples taxes wherever possible we have raised the tax-free personal allowance to 10,600 from 6,475: over 26 million people are now keeping more of their hard-earned money and 3 million of the lowest paid are paying noincome tax at all we believe that cutting peoples taxes is the right thing to do  not only because it is your money, but also because cutting the taxes of the lowest paid and helping them stand on their own two feet is the most effective poverty-tackling measure there is.real fairness means that where people really cannot work, they must be supported  but where they areable to work, they should we have made long overdue changes to our welfare system. we have capped benefits so no household can take more in out-of-work benefits than the average household earns by going out to work we have begun to introduce universal credit  a wayto simplify benefits into a new single payment  so that work always pays we are reassessing those on incapacity benefits so that help goes to those who really need it. the days of something for nothing are over  and all this has helped to reduce by 900,000 the number of people living in workless householdsin the next parliament, we will continue to reward hard work: raising the tax-free personal allowance so that those working 30 hours on the minimum wage paycutting your taxes, making welfare fairer and controlling immigration 253. cutting your taxes, making welfare fairer and controlling immigrationthe conservative party manifesto 201526 securing a better future for you, your family and britainthe conservative party manifesto 2015the goal of welfare reform should be to reward hard work and protect the vulnerableno income tax at all and taking hardworking people out of a 40p higher rate tax band originally meant to capture only the wealthy and we will see through our welfare reforms, lowering the benefit cap and rolling out universal credit, to make the system fairer and reward hard workour plan of action:we will reward worka conservative government will not increase the rates of vat, income tax or national insurance in the next parliament instead, we will ease the burden of taxation by raising the tax-free personal allowance  the amount you can earn before you start paying tax  to 12,500 this will cut income tax for 30 million people and take everyone who earns less than 12,500 out of income tax altogether that means by the end of the decade, one million more people on the lowest wages will be lifted out of income tax, and people who work for 30 hours a week on the increased national minimum wage will no longer pay any income tax at all we will passa new law so that the personal allowance automatically rises in line with the national minimum wage the new tax free minimum wage law will be applied from the first budget after the general election. the change will update the 1977 'rooker-wise' amendment which forced governments to uprate tax thresholds in line with inflation, meaning the personal allowance will now increase more quicklywe will cut income tax for 30 million people  so that hard work is always rewardedwe will back your ambitionthe 40p tax rate was only supposed to be paid by the best-off people in our country. but in the past couple of decades, far too many have been dragged into itwe have already announced an above-inflation increase in the threshold next year now we will raise the 40p tax threshold much further, so that no one earning less than 50,000 pays the higher rate of income tax the 800,000 people earning between 42,385 and 50,000 will no longer pay the 40p rate of taxwe will support you as you raise your familywe will support you, whether you choose to go out to work or stay at home to raise your children we willback the institution of marriage in our society, enabling married couples to transfer 1,060 of their tax-free income to their husband or wife, where the highest earner is a basic rate taxpayer this applies to civil partnerships too, and the transferable amount will always rise at least in line with the personal allowance and we will help families stay together and handle the stresses of modern life by continuing to invest at least 75 million a year in relationship supportwe will bring in tax-free childcare to help parents return to work, and give working parents of three and four year-olds 30 hours of free childcare a weekwe have already legislated to introduce tax-free childcare in the next parliament  worth up to 2,000 per child per year  to help parents who want to work we introduced 15 hours a week of free childcare for all three and four-year olds and the most deprived two- year-olds and because working families with children under school age face particularly high childcare costs, in the next parliament we will give families where all parents are working an entitlement to 30 hours of free childcare for their three and four year-oldswe will cap the uk's overall welfare spending, to save you moneywe will keep a check on the growth of welfare spending, enabling us to provide a system that is fair to those who need it, and fair to those who pay for it too our overall welfare cap will limit the amount that governmentcutting your taxes, making welfare fairer and controlling immigration 273. cutting your taxes, making welfare fairer and controlling immigrationthe conservative party manifesto 2015a welfare system that is fair to those who need it, and fair to those who pay for it too: stopping benefit cheats and ending welfare abusecan spend on certain social security benefits in the five years from 2015-16. we will freeze working age benefits for two years from april 2016, with exemptions for disability and pensioner benefits  as at present  as well as maternity allowance, statutory maternity pay, statutory paternity pay, statutory adoption pay and statutory sick pay we will deliver universal credit,in order to provide the right incentives for people to work; target support at those who need it most; reduce fraud and error; and streamline administration of the welfare system we will work to eliminate child poverty and introduce better measures to drive real changewe will lower the benefit cap from 26,000 to 23,000 to reward workin childrens lives, by recognising the root causes of poverty: entrenched worklessness, family breakdown, problem debt, and drug and alcohol dependencywe will reduce the household benefit cap to make the system fairerwe will lower the maximum amount that a single household can claim in benefits each year from 26,000 to 23,000, so we reward work we will continue to have exemptions from the cap for those receiving disability living allowance or the personal independence paymentwe will help you back into work if you have a long-term yet treatable conditionwe will make sure the hardest to help receive the support they need for a fulfilling life. we will review how bestto support those suffering from long-term yet treatable conditions, such as drug or alcohol addiction, or obesity, back into work. people who might benefit from treatment should get the medical help they need so they can return to work if they refuse a recommended treatment, we will review whether their benefits should be reduced. we will also provide significant new support for mental health, benefiting thousands of people claiming out-of-work benefits or being supported by fit for work.28the conservative party manifesto 2015controlled immigration that benefits britainour commitment to you:our plan to control immigration will put you, your family and the british people first. we will reduce the number of people coming to our country with tough new welfare conditions and robust enforcement. we will:keep our ambition of delivering annual net migration in the tens of thousands, not the hundreds of thousandscontrol migration from the european union, by reforming welfare rulesclamp down on illegal immigration and abuse of the minimum wageenhance our border security and strengthen the enforcement of immigration rules develop a fund to ease pressure on local areas and public services.conservatives believe in controlled immigration, not mass immigration. immigration brings real benefits to britain  to our economy, our culture and our national life we will always be a party that is open, outward- looking and welcoming to people from all aroundthe world we also know that immigration must be controlled when immigration is out of control, it puts pressure on schools, hospitals and transport; and it can cause social pressures if communities find it hard to integratewe must work to control immigration and put britain firstbetween 1997 and 2009, under the last labour government, we had the largest influx of people britain had ever seen their open borders policy, combined with their failure to reform welfare, meant that foryears over 90 percent of employment growth in this country was accounted for by foreign nationals  even though there were 14 million people who spent mostof the 2000s living on out-of-work benefits. for the past five years, we have been working to turn around the situation we inheritedsince 2010, we have stripped more than 850 boguscolleges of their rights to sponsor foreign students; installed proper exit checks at our borders; cracked down on illegal working and sham marriages; madeit harder for people to live in the uk illegally, by restricting their access to bank accounts, driving licences and private housing; and reduced the number ofappeal routes to stop people clogging up our courts with spurious attempts to remain in the country all of this has made a difference. immigration from outside the eu has come down since 2010non-eu migration cut by 13 per cent  and economic migration from outside the eu cappedwe have seen many more people from the eu coming to britain than originally anticipated, principally because our economy has been growing so much more rapidly and creating more jobs than other eu countries as a result, our action has not been enough to cut annual net migration to the tens of thousands that ambition remains the right one but it is clearly going to take more time, more work and more difficult long-term decisions to achieve continuing this vital work will be our priority over the next five years.we will negotiate new rules with the eu, so that peoplecutting your taxes, making welfare fairer and controlling immigration 293. cutting your taxes, making welfare fairer and controlling immigrationthe conservative party manifesto 2015will have to be earning here for a number of years before they can claim benefits, including the tax credits that top up low wages instead of something-for- nothing, we will build a system based on the principleof something-for-something we will then put these changes to the british people in a straight in-out referendum on our membership of the european union by the end of 2017 at the same time, we will continue to strengthen our borders, improve the enforcement of our immigration laws and act to make sure people leave at the end of their visas across the spectrum, from the student route to the family and work routes, we will build a system that truly puts you, your family and the british people first.our plan of action:we will regain control of eu migration by reforming welfare ruleschanges to welfare to cut eu migration will be an absolute requirement in the renegotiation we have already banned housing benefit for eu jobseekers, and restricted other benefits, including jobseeker's allowance. we will insist that eu migrants who want to claim tax credits and child benefit must live here and contributeto our country for a minimum of four years this will reduce the financial incentive for lower-paid, lower- skilled workers to come to britain we will introduce a new residency requirement for social housing, so that eu migrants cannot even be considered for a council house unless they have been living in an area for at least four years if an eu migrants child is living abroad, then they should receive no child benefit or child tax credit, no matter how long they have worked in the uk andno matter how much tax they have paid to reduce the numbers of eu migrants coming to britain, we will end the ability of eu jobseekers to claim any job-seeking benefits at all. and if jobseekers have not found a job within six months, they will be required to leavetougher tests for migrants before they can claim benefitswe will tackle criminality and abuse of free movementwe will negotiate with the eu to introduce stronger powers to deport criminals and stop them coming back, and tougher and longer re-entry bans for all those who abuse free movement we want to toughen requirements for non-eu spouses to join eu citizens, including with an income threshold and english language test and when new countries are admitted to the eu in future, we will insist that free movement cannot apply to those new members until their economies have converged much more closely with existing member stateswe will continue to cut immigration from outside the euwe have already capped the level of skilled economic migration from outside the eu we will maintain our cap at 20,700 during the next parliament this will ensure that we only grant visas to those who have the skills we really need in our economy we will reform the student visa system with new measures to tackle abuse and reduce the numbers of students overstaying once their visas expire our action will include clamping down on the number of so-called satellite campuses opened in london by universities located elsewherein the uk, and reviewing the highly trusted sponsor system for student visas and as the introduction of exit checks will allow us to place more responsibility on visa sponsors for migrants who overstay, we will introduce targeted sanctions for those colleges or businesses that fail to ensure that migrants comply with the terms of their visawe will strengthen the enforcement of immigration ruleswe have introduced a deport first, appeal later rulefor foreign national offenders. we will now removeeven more illegal immigrants by extending this rule to all immigration appeals and judicial reviews, including where a so-called right to family life is involved, apart from asylum claims we will also implement a new removals strategy to take away opportunities for spurious legal challenge and opportunities to abscond we will introduce satellite tracking for every foreign national offender subject to an outstanding deportation order or deportation proceedings and we will implement the30the conservative party manifesto 2015requirement for all landlords to check the immigration status of their tenantswe will tackle people trafficking and exploitationwe have already re-introduced a proper system of exit checks across the country, passed a modern slavery act that will protect people from exploitation, and quadrupled the fines for unscrupulous employers who undercut the minimum wage now we will introduce tougher labour market regulation to tackle illegal working and exploitation to crack down further on illegal working, we will harness data from multiple agencies, including exit checks data, to identify illegal immigrants and businesses that employ illegal workers and to incentivise tougher action on employers who do not pay the minimum wage, we will allow inspection teams to reinvest more of the money raised by fines levied on employerswe will ease pressure on public services and your local communitywe are taking unprecedented action to tackle health tourism and will recover up to 500 million from migrants who use the nhs by the middle of the next parliament to help communities experiencing high and unexpected volumes of immigration, we will introducea new controlling migration fund to ease pressures on services and to pay for additional immigration enforcement to prevent sectors becoming partially or wholly reliant on foreign workers, we will require those regularly utilising the shortage occupation list, under which they can bring skilled foreign workers into the uk, to provide long-term plans for training british workerswe will protect british values and our way of lifewe will promote integration and british valuesbeing able to speak english is a fundamental part of integrating into our society we have introduced tough new language tests for migrants and ensured councils reduce spending on translation services next, wewill legislate to ensure that every public sector worker operating in a customer-facing role must speak fluent english and to encourage better integration into our society, we will also require those coming to britain on a family visa with only basic english to become more fluent over time, with new language tests for those seeking a visa extensioncutting your taxes, making welfare fairer and controlling immigration 313. cutting your taxes, making welfare fairer and controlling immigrationthe conservative party manifesto 201532 securing a better future for you, your family and britainthe conservative party manifesto 2015giving your child the best start in lifeour commitment to you:your child deserves the best start in life. a good education is not a luxury; it should be a right for everyone. we will:ensure a good primary school place for your child, with zero tolerance for failure turn every failing and coasting secondary school into an academy and deliver freeschools for parents and communities that want themhelp teachers to make britain the best country in the world for developing maths,engineering, science and computing skillscreate 3 million new apprenticeships and make sure there is no cap on university places,so we have aspiration for all.we know what works in education: great teachers; brilliant leadership; rigour in the curriculum; discipline in the classroom; proper exams we have been bold in reforming the education system to deliver these things, based upon simple, clear principles and values we believe that parents and teachers should be empowered to run their schools independently we believe that teaching is a highly skilled profession, and that we need to attract the best graduates into it and we believe that there is no substitute for a rigorous academic curriculum to secure the best from every pupilwe inherited a system where far too many children left school without the qualifications and skills they needed. one in three children was leaving primary school unable to read, write and add up properly the number of pupils studying the core academic subjects at gcse had halved our schools had fallen down the global league tablesfor maths and science and the poorest children were attending the weakest schoolsour far-reaching education reforms have changed this we have brought high standards back to teaching, discipline back to schools, and challenging subjects back onto the curriculum today, there are a million more pupils in schools rated by ofsted as good or outstanding overa thousand schools that were ranked inadequate have become academies, bringing in new leadership to promote discipline, rigour and higher standardsthere are over 250 new free schools  set up and run by local people  delivering better education for the children who need it most we have boosted the number of apprenticeships to record levels  22 million over the last five years  and last september more people headed off to university than at any time in history too many children, however, are still not receiving the excellent education that they deserve so we will continue our reforms, so that every child has the best possible start in lifethere are a million more pupils in schools rated by ofsted as good or outstandingour plan of action:we will drive up standards in your childs schoolwe have made exams more rigorous and ended grade inflation. there is more to do. we will start by introducing tough new standards for literacy and numeracy in primary schools we will expect every 11-year-old to know their times tables off by heart and be able to perform long division and complex multiplication they should beable to read a book and write a short story with accurate punctuation, spelling and grammar if children do notthe best schools and hospitals for you and your family334. the best schools and hospitals for you and your familythe conservative party manifesto 2015reach the required standards in their exams at the endof primary school, they will resit them at the start of secondary school, to make sure no pupil is left behind we will require secondary school pupils to take gcsesin english, maths, science, a language and history or geography, with ofsted unable to award its highest ratings to schools that refuse to teach these core subjectswe will ensure there is a good primary school place for your child, with zero tolerance of failurewe have more than doubled labours spending on new school places but we want to go even further, investing at least 7 billion over the next parliament to provide good school places and we will let our best headteachers take control of failing primary schools, by expanding the national leaders of education programmeevery school needs high standards, proper funding and accountabilitywe will turn every failing and coasting secondary school into an academy, and deliver free schools if parents in your area want themover 4,000 schools are already benefiting from academy status, giving them more power over discipline and budgets and nearly 800 of the worst-performing primary schools have been taken over by experienced academy sponsors with a proven track record of success this is improving education for our children so wewill continue to expand academies, free schools, studio schools and university technical colleges over the next parliament, we will open at least 500 new free schools, resulting in 270,000 new school places and we will introduce new powers to force coasting schools to accept new leadership any school judged by ofsted to be requiring improvement will be taken over bythe best headteachers  backed by expert sponsorsor high-performing neighbouring schools  unless it can demonstrate that it has a plan to improve rapidly we will continue to allow all good schools to expand, whether they are maintained schools, academies, free schools or grammar schoolswe will continue to protect school fundingover the last five years, we have protected the schools budget and committed 18 billion for new school buildings, sothat children can learn in the best environment possible under a future conservative government, the amount of money following your child into school will be protectedas the number of pupils increases, so will the amount of money in our schools on current pupil number forecasts, there will be a real-terms increase in the schools budget in the next parliament we will continue to provide the pupil premium, protected at current rates, so that schools receive additional money for those from the poorest backgrounds we will support families by providing free meals to all infants and we will make schools funding fairer we have already increased funding for the 69 least well-funded local authorities in the country, and will make this the baseline for their funding in the next parliament we will not allow state schools to make a profit.we will back your childs teacherswe have already given teachers greater disciplinary powers in the next parliament, we will expect every teacher to be trained not just in how to tackle serious behaviour issues, but also in how to deal with the low level disruption that stops children from learning properly this generation of teachers is already the best-qualified ever. in future, we will recruit and keep the best teachers by reducing the time they spend on paperwork, introducing bursaries for the most in-demand subjects, paying good teachers more, further reducing the burden of ofsted inspections and continuing to encourage the growth of teach first we will increase the number of teachers able to teach mandarin in schools in england, so we can compete in the global race we want teachers to be regarded in the same way as other highly skilled professionals, so we are supporting the creationof an independent college of teaching to promote the highest standards of teaching and school leadershipwe will lead the world in maths and sciencewe have increased the time schools will spend on maths, and ensured that children learn to code as soon as they start school maths is now the most popular a-level subject we aim to make britain the best place in the world to study maths, science and engineering, measured by improved performance in the pisa league tables to help achieve this, we will train an extra 17,500 maths and physics34the conservative party manifesto 2015schools budget protected with 5 billion given to tackle labours school places crisisteachers over the next five years. we will make sure that all students are pushed to achieve their potential and create more opportunities to stretch the most ablewe will protect childrenevery child deserves a warm, loving home, and to feel safe online and at school we have made improving supportfor children and young people with special educational needs and disabilities a priority we have created 2,200 more special schools places through our free schools programme, introduced a coordinated assessment process to determine a child or young persons needs, and funded degree-level specialist training for teachers and support staff. and to make sure its working, ofsted now formally inspects local areas for their effectiveness in fulfilling their new duties we have made progress in reforming our adoption system, but there is more to do we will introduce regional adoption agencies, working across local authority boundaries to match children with the best parents for them we will continue to raise the quality of childrens social work, by expanding training programmes, such as frontline, and creating new opportunities to develop the next generation of leaders in the field. we will continue to tackle all forms of bullying in our schools and we will stop children's exposure to harmful sexualised content online, by requiring age verification for access to all sites containing pornographic material and age-rating for all music videoswe will improve skills trainingwe have given employers much more control over apprenticeship courses, so they teach skills relevant to the workplace we will continue to replace lower-level, classroom-based further education courses with high- quality apprenticeships that combine training with experience of work and a wage we will ensure there is achild poverty is down  with 300,000 fewer children living in povertyuniversity technical college within reach of every city we will abolish employers' national insurance contributionson earnings up to the upper earnings limit for apprentices under the age of 25 and we will roll out many more degree apprenticeships, allowing young people to combine a world-class degree with a world-class apprenticeshipwe will improve further educationwe will continue to improve further education through our network of national colleges, which will provide specialist higher-level vocational training in sectors critical to economic growth we will publish more earnings and destination data for further education courses, and require more accreditation of courses by employerswe will ensure that if you want to go to university, you canthis year, for the first time, over half a million peoplehave been admitted to our universities, including a record proportion of students from disadvantaged backgrounds from september, we will go even further, abolishing thecap on higher education student numbers and removingan arbitrary ceiling on ambition our reforms to university funding mean you do not have to pay anything towards tuition while studying, and only start paying back if you earn over 21,000 per year we will ensure the continuing success and stability of these reforms, so that the interests of both students and taxpayers are fairly represented we will also introduce a national postgraduate loan system for taught masters and phd courses we will ensure that universities deliver the best possible value for money to students: wewill introduce a framework to recognise universities offering the highest teaching quality; encourage universities tooffer more two-year courses; and require more data to be openly available to potential students so that they can make decisions informed by the career paths of past graduateswe will ensure that our universities remain world-leadingwe will maintain our universities reputation for world-class research and academic excellence through the nurse review of research councils, we will seek to ensure that the uk continues to support world-leading science, and invests public money in the best possible way and we will encourage the development of online education as a tool for students, whether studying independently or in our universitiesthe best schools and hospitals for you and your family354. the best schools and hospitals for you and your familythe conservative party manifesto 201536 securing a better future for you, your family and britainthe conservative party manifesto 2015protecting and improving our national health serviceour commitment to you:our national health service must be there for you throughout your life. we will:continue to increase spending on the nhs, supported by a strong economy, so the nhs stays free for you to usespend at least an additional 8 billion by 2020 over and above inflation to fund and support the nhss own action plan for the next five yearsensure you can see a gp and receive the hospital care you need, 7 days a week by 2020, with a guarantee that everyone over 75 will get a same-day appointment if they need oneintegrate health and social care, through our better care fund lead the world in fighting cancer and finding a cure for dementiathe nhs is vitally important to all of us founded on the principle that no one should ever have to worry about their ability to pay for their healthcare, it is a profound expression of our values as a nationpatients, doctors and nurses are the experts on howto improve peoples health so we have given greater power and accountability to the frontline than any other government we cleared out bureaucracy, generating savings which we have invested in care for patients instead of chasing managerial targets, we have focused on outcomes and performance and we have given patients more power by providing them with more informationunder labour, micro-management from whitehall clogged-up the system a cover-up culture developed, where doctors and nurses were scared to speak out about the appalling standards of care at hospitals in places such as stafford and morecambe bay. by the time labour left office, our cancer survival rates lagged far behind those of other countries, and more than 18,000 patients had been waiting for over a year to start their treatmentwe are building an nhs that is more efficient, more effective and more accountablewe are putting things right we protected the nhs budget our doctors and nurses are now doing over a millionmore operations each year than in 2010 our cancer drugs fund has given more than 60,000 people access to life-saving drugs we have doubled funding for dementia research hospital infections have halved an independent think tank, the commonwealth fund, has found that under the conservatives the nhs has become the best healthcare system of any major country and patients are reporting the highest levels of satisfaction for years the nhs is performing well in the face of increasing demand, with fewer patients waiting longer than the 18, 26 and52 week targets than in may 2010 we have slashed the number of people who wait over a year for the treatment they need, from over 18,000 to under 500despite this progress, our nhs faces major challengesan ageing population will place more pressure on health and social care, and life-saving but expensive new drugs will push up costs and for years its been too hard to access the nhs out of hours, even though sudden illness and events which you and your family cannot plan for do not respect normal working hours we will rise to these challenges by building a strong economy, we will be able to increase spending in real terms every year with a future conservative government, you will have a truly 7-day nhs, at the frontier of science, offering you new drugs and treatments, safeguarded for years to comethe best schools and hospitals for you and your family374. the best schools and hospitals for you and your familyour plan of action:we will deliver a strong nhs through a strong economywe are set to increase health spending by more than 7 billion above and beyond inflation in the five years since 2010 and we will continue spend more on the nhs, in real terms, every year. the nhs is more efficient now than it has ever been we will implement the nhss own plan to improve health care even further  the five year forward view because of our long-term economic plan, we are able to commit to increasing nhs spending in england in real terms by a minimum of 8 billion over the next five years. combined with the efficiencies that the nhs forward view sets out, this will provide the funding necessary to implement this plan in fullwe are prioritising resourcesto frontline services  with 9,500 more doctors and 6,900 more nurseswe will make the nhs more convenient for youwe want england to be the first nation in the world to provide a truly 7 day nhs already millions more people can see a gp 7 days a week, from 8am-8pm, but by 2020 we want this for everyone we will now go further, with hospitals properly staffed, so that the quality of care is the sameevery day of the week we will restore your right to access a specific, named gp  something that labour abolished. we will ensure that your family doctor appointments and repeat prescriptions are routinely available online, wherever you live and we will guarantee same-day gp appointments for all over 75s who need themwe will offer you the safest and most compassionate care in the worldwe will ensure that english hospitals and gp surgeries are the safest in the world, places where you are treated with dignity and respect we will continue to eliminate mixed-sex wards and hospital infections we will ensurewe have increased the nhs budget above inflation every yearthat the nhs is accountable when mistakes are made, and implement the recommendations of the independent review into the stafford hospital scandal. we will ensure that the independent care quality commission rates all hospitals, care homes and gp surgeries we introduced expert chief inspectors to promote excellence and root out poor care, and we will continue to back them we are deeply proud of our nhs staff, who are the best in the world. over the last five years, we have hired thousands more doctors and nurses we will continue to ensure that we have enough doctors, nurses and other staff to meet patients needs, and consider how best to recognise and reward high performancewe will help you make informed choices about your healthcarewe will improve standards in all areas of care in 2013we introduced the friends and family test so you could provide feedback on the care and treatment you received; we aim to increase the proportion of people who rate their experience as excellent or very good we will boost transparency even further, ensuring you can access full information about the safety record of your hospital and other nhs or independent providers, and give patients greater choice over where and how they receive care we will give you full access to your own electronic health records, while retaining your right to opt-out of your records being shared electronicallywe will support you and your family to stay healthywe are helping people to stay healthy by ending the open display of tobacco in shops, introducing plainpackaged cigarettes and funding local authority public health budgets we will take action to reduce childhood obesity and continue to promote clear food information we will support people struggling with addictions and undertake a review into howpeople deserve patient-centred healthcare not more bureaucracythe conservative party manifesto 201538best to support those suffering from long-term yet treatable conditions, such as drug or alcohol addiction, or obesity, back in to work. we will be the first country to implement a national, evidence-based diabetes prevention programme and we will invest more in primary care, to help prevent health problems before they startwe will ensure you receive the best healthcarewe will speed up your access to new medicines by implementing the findings of our innovative medicines and medical technology review we will increase theuse of cost-effective new medicines and technologies, and encourage large-scale trials of innovative technologies and health services antibiotic resistance is a major health risk so we will continue to lead the global fight against it, taking forward the recommendations of the independent review launched by the prime minister, david cameron andwe will support our long-term economic plan by fostering research, innovation and jobs in the life science industrywe will help if you or your loved ones are affected by cancercancer survival rates are improving, and are now the best they have ever been we will continue to invest in our life- saving cancer drugs fund we will work with the nhs, charities and patient groups to deliver the new strategy recommended by nhs englands cancer taskforcethis will improve survival rates and save thousands of lives through enhanced prevention, earlier detectionand diagnosis, and better treatment and care we will continue to support research to improve the diagnosis and treatment of rare diseases and cancers, including throughover 60,000 people have benefited from the cancer drugs funddecoding 100,000 whole genomes this will help scientists and doctors understand diseases better, and design more effective, personalised treatments.we will continue to take your mental health as seriously as your physical healthwe have legislated to ensure that mental and physical health conditions are given equal priority we will now go further, ensuring that there are therapists in every part of the country providing treatment for those who need it we are increasing funding for mental health care we will enforce the new access and waiting time standards for people experiencing mental ill-health, including children and young people building on our success in training thousands of nurses and midwives to become health visitors, we will ensure that women have access to mental health support during and after pregnancy, while strengthening the health visiting programme for new motherswe will ensure that people can grow old in comfort and dignitywe have led the world on fighting dementia, and will deliver our strategy  the prime ministers challenge on dementia 2020  making sure that everyone diagnosed with the condition gets a meaningful care plan to support them and their family we will increase support for full- time unpaid carers we will guarantee that you will not have to sell your home to fund your residential social care too many people spend their last days in hospital when they would prefer to die closer to home; we will support commissioners to combine better health and social care services for the terminally ill so that more people are able to die in a place of their choice we will continue to integrate the health and social care systems, joining-up services between homes, clinics and hospitals, including through piloting new approaches like the pooling of around6 billion of health and social care funding in greater manchester and the 53 billion better care fundthe conservative party manifesto 2015the best schools and hospitals for you and your family394. the best schools and hospitals for you and your familythe conservative party manifesto 201540 securing a better future for you, your family and britainthe conservative party manifesto 2015enabling you to enjoy our heritage, creativity and sportsour commitment to you:wherever you live in the country, we want you to be able to enjoy the best our culture and sports have to offer. we will:keep our major national museums and galleries free to entersupport school sport, build on our olympic and paralympic legacy, and deliver the rugbyand cricket world cups and the world athletics championships freeze the bbc licence fee, to save you moneysupport our creative industries and defend a free mediaone of the highlights of the past five years was the london olympic and paralympic games those weeks in 2012 demonstrated the best of our country when the pressure is on, we deliver; when the stakes are high, we come together; when it comes to taking on the world, we can winwe may not be the biggest country, but our museums are second to none in music, art, fashion, theatre, design, film, television and the performing arts, we have an edge conservatives understand these things do not just enhance our national prestige and boost our economy; they help tie our country together, strengthening the bonds between all of usthats why, despite all the economic chaos we inherited, we have put over 8 billion of public and lottery funding into the arts, heritage, museums and galleries during the last five years. we have also boosted school sports and increased the share of national lottery funding going to good causesculture and sport help bring us closer together as a nation, strengthening the bonds between all of usour plan of action:we will support our world-leading museums, galleries and heritagewe will keep our major national museums and galleries free to enter and enable our cultural institutions to benefit from greater financial autonomy to use their budgets as they see fit. over the last five years, we have made sure that arts funding benefits the whole of the uk. we will support a great exhibition in the north; back plans for a new theatre, the factory, manchester; and help the manchester museum, in partnership with the british museum, to establish a new india gallery we are also supporting plans to develop a modern world class concert hall for london we will ensure the protection and enjoyment of oneour most ancient and precious heritage sites by buildinga tunnel where the a303 passes closest to stonehengewe significantly increased national lottery funding for heritage and have created a brand new heritage charity  english heritage  to support more than 400 buildings and monuments and we will continue to support essential roof repairs for our cathedrals and churches, along with other places of worshipwe will continue to support local librarieswe will help public libraries to support local communities by providing free wi-fi. and we will assist them in embracing the digital age by working with themthe best schools and hospitals for you and your family414. the best schools and hospitals for you and your familythe conservative party manifesto 2015to ensure remote access to e-books, without charge and with appropriate compensation for authors that enhances the public lending right schemewe will support our mediaa free media is the bedrock of an open society wewill deliver a comprehensive review of the bbc royal charter, ensuring it delivers value for money for the licence fee payer, while maintaining a world class service and supporting our creative industries that is whywe froze the bbc licence fee and will keep it frozen, pending charter renewal and we will continue to top- slice the licence fee for digital infrastructure to support superfast broadband across the countrywe will defend press freedomwe will continue to defend hard-won liberties and the operation of a free press but alongside the medias rights comes a clear responsibility, which is why we set up the public, judge-led leveson inquiry in responseto the phone-hacking scandal, created a new watchdog by royal charter and legislated to toughen media libel laws because the work of the free press is so important we will offer explicit protection for the role of journalists via the british bill of rights and we will ban the police from accessing journalists phone records to identify whistle-blowers and other sources without prior judicial approval local newspapers are an important source of information for local communities and a vital part of a healthy democracy to support them as they adapt to new technology and changing circumstances, we will consult on the introduction of a business rates relief for local newspapers in englandwe will support our creative industriesthe creative industries have become our fastest-growing economic sector, contributing nearly 77 billion to the uk economy  driven in part by the tax incentives for films, theatre, video games, animation and orchestras we introduced. our support for the film industryhas resulted in great british films and encouraged hollywoods finest to flock to the uk. we will continue these reliefs, with a tax credit for childrens television next year, and expand them when possible we will protect intellectual property by continuing to require internet service providers to block sites that carry largeamounts of illegal content, including their proxies and we will build on progress made under our voluntary anti-piracy projects to warn internet users when they are breaching copyright we will work to ensure that search engines do not link to the worst-offending sites.we will continue to support tourism in our countryour tourism industry already supports three million jobs and is one of the nations leading employers and export earners we will set challenging targets for visit britain and visit england to ensure more visitors travel outside the capital we will simplify and speed up visa issuance for tourists and because tourism is an industry that depends more than most on young people, we will step up efforts to recruit more apprentices into the business.we will build on our olympic and paralympic legacywe want our sportsmen and women to win even more medals in rio 2016 than they did in london 2012 sowe will continue to support elite sports funding as partof our olympic and paralympic legacy we will deliver the rugby world cup in 2015, the world athletics championship in 2017, ipc world championships in 2017 and the cricket world cup in 2019, maximising the opportunities for tourism and jobs we will support new sports in the uk, in particular through greater links with the us national football league, the national basketball association and major league baseball, with the ultimate ambition of new franchises being based herewe will boost sport in your communitywe have already boosted funding for sport in primary schools and over 18,000 schools have registered totake part in our school games we will go further, supporting primary school sport with 150 million a year, paid directly to head-teachers, until 2020 this will make sure that all primary schoolchildren benefit fromschool games supported with over 150 million of national lottery and public money42a minimum of two hours high-class sport and pe each week we will improve the quality of community sports facilities, working with local authorities, the football association and the premier league to fund investment in artificial football pitches in more than 30 cities across england we will continue to invest in participationand physical activity, recognising sports vital benefits to health and to nhs englands campaign to prevent diabetes we will lift the number of women on national sports governing bodies to at least 25 per cent by 2017, and seek to increase participation in sport by women and girlsthe conservative party manifesto 2015the best schools and hospitals for you and your family 434. the best schools and hospitals for you and your familythe conservative party manifesto 201544 securing a better future for you, your family and britainthe conservative party manifesto 2015helping you build the big societyour commitment to you:building the big society is about involving the people, neighbourhoods, villages, towns and cities of britain in the great task of improving our country  and giving young people the power and opportunity to play a real part in their community. we will:guarantee your child a place on national citizen service, so they can learn new skills and meet young people from different walks of lifepromote equal treatment and equal opportunity for all in a society proud of its tolerance and diversitygive those who work for a big company and the public sector a new workplace entitlement to volunteering leave for three days a year, on full pay.the big society is a vision of a more engaged nation, one in which we take more responsibility for ourselves and our neighbours; communities working together, not depending on remote and impersonal bureaucracies. of course, there are many tasks which require the resources and grip of government. but there are also many areas of nationallife in which we need more people to step forward, take responsibility and play their part. this is about a national culture change, saying to everyone in britain: ask what you can do for your community and your country.volunteering is at a 10-year high, with 3 million more adults giving their time last year than in 2010in the past five years, there has been real progress. volunteering is now at a ten-year high, with over three million more adults giving their time last year than in the year to march 2010. charitable donations are on the up, with one million more people giving to good causes than at the end of the last parliament. there are now parents groups and charities running their own free schools. there are social enterprises helping people into jobs through the work programme. we have launched the worlds first social investment bank, introduced more social impact bonds than the rest of the world combinedand highlighted the great work done in communities with the big society awards and the prime ministers points of light award.a generation of teenagers has undertaken national citizen service (ncs), developing their skills, broadening their horizons and growing in confidence; over the next five years, we will expand ncs  so it becomes a rite of passage for young people in our country. we will give more people the power and support to run a school, start their own social enterprise, and take over their own local parks, landmarks and pubs. we will encourage the 1,400 communities engaged in neighbourhood planning to complete the process and assist others to draw up their own plans. and we will take new steps to encourage volunteering, enabling more people to join the unsung heroes who are the backbone of communities across britain.our plan of action:we will expand national citizen serviceover 130,000 young people have graduated from ncs and we have now guaranteed a place on ncs for every 16 and 17-year-old who wants one. in addition to this, we will increase the number of cadet units in schools, so that more students have the chance to learn skills such as leadership and self-reliance.the best schools and hospitals for you and your family454. the best schools and hospitals for you and your familythe conservative party manifesto 2015we will innovate in how we deliver public serviceswe have pioneered ways to deliver high-quality public services, including through getting the voluntary sector more involved for example, our work programme has helped harness the talent and energy of charities to help people turn their lives around and find their way backinto work we will examine ways to build on this type of innovative approach in the future we have also pioneered the use of social impact bonds and payment-by-results, and we will look to scale these up in the future, focusing on youth unemployment, mental health and homelessnesswe will help you volunteer and support action to help the vulnerablewe will support the prince of wales step up to serve initiative, encouraging young people to serve in their community and we will make volunteering for three days a year a workplace entitlement for people working in large companies and the public sector people could, for example, volunteer for a local charity or serve as a schoolover 130,000 young people have taken part in national citizen servicegovernor we have always believed that churches, faith groups and other voluntary groups play an important and longstanding role in this countrys social fabric, running foodbanks, helping the homeless, and tackling debt and addictions, such as alcoholism and gambling we have already introduced tougher regulation of gambling, with enhanced player protections and planning controls to prevent the further proliferation of high street betting shops; we've capped payday lending and backed financial inclusion; and will continue to support action that helps vulnerable people get the assistance they needwe will champion equal rights and correct past wrongsour historic introduction of gay marriage has helped drive forward equality and strengthened the institutionof marriage but there is still more to do, and wewill continue to champion equality for lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender people we will build on the posthumous pardon of enigma codebreaker alan turing, who committed suicide following his conviction for gross indecency, with a broader measure to lift the blight of outdated convictions of this nature thousands of british men still suffer from similar historic charges, even though they would be completely innocent of any crime today many others are dead and cannot correct this injustice themselves through the legal process we have introduced while in government so we will introduce a new law that will pardon those people, and right these wrongs46the conservative party manifesto 2015making government work better for youour commitment to you:the government is the servant of the british people. every pound spent must be scrutinised, and government run as efficiently and effectively as possible. we will:save you money by cutting government wasteput more of the essential services you use online, to make them more convenientcontinue to make government more transparent, so you can hold us to account for how your money is being spent.government is the servant of the british people, not their master. that simple fact was forgotten when labour was in power. quangos grew in number, wasteful projects proliferated and the bureaucracy swelled  symptoms of a government that believed it always knew best.hardworking taxpayers deserve a government that is more efficient and accountableconservatives have brought in a new approach. we are determined to measure success not by how much money is spent, but how much it improves peoples lives. whitehall is now leaner and smaller than at any time since the second world war. we have halvedthe running costs of the department for education. we have abolished or merged over 300 quangos. we have moved paperwork online. we have shone a bright light on government spending  requiring all central government spending over 25,000 to be published online. we have also ensured that people receive a transparent breakdown of how their taxes are spent.in the next five years, we will ensure this efficiency revolution continues. we will also continue to reform our political system: make votes of more equal value through long overdue boundary reforms, reducing the number of mps and ensuring the electoral commission does more14.3 billion was saved in 2014 through efficiencies in government  equivalent to nearly 850 for every working householdto tackle voting fraud. these measures will help to restore public confidence in british politics.our plan of action:we will cut government wastewe have reduced the cost of government, by selling empty buildings, managing big projects better, shrinking the civil service, reforming pensions, moving more services online, and improving contracting. we plan a further 10 billion annual savings by 2017-18 and 15- 20 billion in 2019-20.to eliminate the deficit, we must continue to cut out wasteful spendingthe best schools and hospitals for you and your family474. the best schools and hospitals for you and your familythe conservative party manifesto 201548we will deliver better public services and more open governmentwe have supported the growth of public service mutuals  organisations that are owned by their staff and deliver public services we want more of them, so we will guarantee a right to mutualise within the public sector this will free up the entrepreneurial spirit of public servants and yield better value for money for taxpayers transparency has also been at the heart of our approach to government over the last five years, we have been open about government spending, provided access to taxpayer-funded research, pursuedopen data and helped establish the open government partnership we will continue to be the most transparent government in the world we addressed public concern about the influence of money on politics, with a law that strengthened rules governing non-party campaigning and established a register of consultant lobbyists in the next parliament, we will legislate to ensure trade unions use a transparent opt-in process for subscriptions to political parties we will continue to seek agreement on a comprehensive package of party funding reformwe will make government more efficientwe value our outstanding public servants. over the last five years, we have made efficiencies in government. we have ruled out the introduction of regional pay in the public sector, which we do not support and will not introduce britain's impartial, professional and highly capable civil service is admired around the world and one of our nation's strengths we will push ahead with reform of the civil service to make it more dynamic and streamlined wewill make recruitment to the civil service more open and actively look for exceptional talent, especially in areas where capabilities are in short supply we will continue to tackle all the bureaucracy of whitehall that clogs the arteries of government. we will end taxpayer-funded six-figure payoffs for the best paid public sector workers we will continue to sell unneeded government property and co-locate services wherever possible we have already created 20 high-quality digital services, which include apprenticeships applications and tax self-assessments we will save you time, hassle and money by moving more services online, while actively tackling digital exclusion we will ensure digital assistance is always available for those who are not online, while rolling out cross-government technology platforms to cut costs and improve productivity  such as govukwe will reform parliamentwe have improved the operation of parliament, strengthening its ability to hold the government to account, with reforms such as the election of select committee chairs and the creation of the backbench business committee, which enables backbenchers, for the first time, to determine a significant proportion of the house of commons business we have also passed the fixed term parliament act, an unprecedented transfer of executive power inthe next parliament, we will address the unfairness of the current parliamentary boundaries, reduce the numberof mps to 600 to cut the cost of politics and make votesof more equal value we will implement the boundary reforms that parliament has already approved and make them apply automatically once the boundary commission reports in 2018 this will deal with the fact that the current electoral layout over-represents parts of the country where populations have been falling and under-represents parts where populations have been risingwe will ensure that the house of lords fulfils its valuable role as a chamber of legislative scrutiny and revisionwhile we still see a strong case for introducing an elected element into our second chamber, this is not a priority inthe next parliament we have already allowed for expulsion of members for poor conduct and will ensure the house of lords continues to work well by addressing issues such as the size of the chamber and the retirement of peers.we will protect our electoral system, to safeguard our democracybuilding on our introduction of individual voter registration, we will continue to make our arrangements fair and effective by ensuring the electoral commission puts greater priority on tackling fraud and considers insisting on proof of id to vote we will complete the electoral register, by working to include more of the five million britons who live abroad we will introduce votes for life, scrapping the rule that bars british citizens who have lived abroad for more than 15 years from voting we will respect the will of the british people, as expressed in the 2011 referendum, and keep first past the post for elections to the house of commons and we will introduce english votes for english laws, answering the longstanding west lothian question in our democracythe conservative party manifesto 2015the best schools and hospitals for you and your family494. the best schools and hospitals for you and your familythe conservative party manifesto 201550 securing a better future for you, your family and britainthe conservative party manifesto 2015helping you to buy a home of your ownour commitment to you:the chance to own your own home should be available to everyone who works hard. we will:help to keep mortgage rates lower by continuing to work through our long-term economic planbuild more homes that people can afford, including 200,000 new starter homes exclusively for first-time buyers under 40extend the help to buy equity loan scheme to 2020 to help more people onto and up the housing ladder, and introduce a new help to buy isa to support people saving for a depositgive more people the chance to own their home by extending the right to buy to tenants of housing associations and create a brownfield fund to unlock homes on brownfield landensure local people have more control over planning and protect the green beltconservatives believe passionately in home ownership we understand how good it feels when you have worked long hours, saved money for years, and finally take possession of the keys to your first home. for years, however, people have been finding it harder and harder to get on the housing ladder under labour, house- building fell to its lowest peacetime level since the 1920s developers were building too few homes andthe aftermath of the banking crisis saw young people struggling to raise a deposithouse building at its highest since 2007these past five years have been about reversing this trend we have unblocked the planning system, to help builders start building again we have introduced help to buy, making it much easier for people to secure a mortgage and we have reinvigorated the right to buy which labour had cut back, extending home ownership to a whole new generation of social tenants as a result, over 200,000 people have been helped either on or up the housing ladder most of those helped have been young first-time buyers spread right across our country.everyone who works hard should be able to own a home of their ownas the party of home ownership, we want to go further and faster  and this manifesto sets out our plan at its heart, a clear objective to build affordable homes, including 200,000 starter homes which will be sold at a 20 per cent discount, and will be built exclusively for first time buyers under the age of 40 at the same time, we will extend our help to buy equity loan scheme, introduce a new help to buy isa, extend the right to buy to housing association tenants and make sure that, when it comes to planning decisions, local people are in chargeand for all those already in their home, we will make sure we continue working through our economic plan, so mortgage rates stay lower for longer and people can keep hold of their homes and plan for the future  safe in the knowledge they have a government that is competently looking after the public finances so they can look after their ownsecuring your home and your neighbourhood515. securing your home and your neighbourhoodthe conservative party manifesto 2015we will continue to work through our plan, so mortgage rates stay lower for longerour plan of action:we will double the number of first-time buyers, and help more people own their own homewe are setting an ambition to double the number of first-time buyers compared to the last five years  helping one million more people to own their own home we will extend help to buy to cover another 120,000 homes  in total helping over 200,000 people and we will continue the help to buy mortgage guarantee until the start of 2017, and the help to buy equity loan until at least 2020 from this autumn, we will introduce a new help to buy isa to support people who are working hard to save up for a deposit for their first home. a ten per cent deposit on the average first home costs 15,000, so if you putin up to 12,000, government will put in up to 3,000 more a 25 per cent top-up is equivalent to saving a deposit from your pre-tax income  making it effectively a tax cut for first-time buyers.our new help to buy isa will support people who are working hard to save for a depositwe will build 200,000 starter homes and more affordable housingwe will build 200,000 quality starter homes over the course of the next parliament, reserved for first-time buyers under 40 and sold at 20 per cent below the market price. we have delivered over 217,000 new affordable homes since 2010 we will now go further, delivering 275,000 additional affordable homes by 2020. and we will offer 10,000 new homes to rent at below market rates,to help people save for a depositwe will extend the right to buy to tenants in housing associationswe will extend the right to buy to tenants in housing associations to enable more people to buy a home of their own it is unfair that they should miss out on a right enjoyed by tenants in local authority homes we will fund the replacement of properties sold under the extended right to buy by requiring local authorities to manage their housing assets more efficiently, with the most expensive properties sold off and replaced as they fall vacant. we will also create a brownfield fund to unlock homes on brownfield land for additional housing.we will give you the right to buildwe aim at least to double the number of custom-built and self-built homes by 2020, and we will take forward a new right to build, requiring councils to allocate land to local people to build or commission their own home, as you can do in most of europewe will protect the green beltwe have safeguarded national green belt protection and increased protection of important green spaces we have abolished the labour governments top-down regional strategies which sought to delete the green belt in and around 30 towns and cities and introduced a new local green space planning designation which allows councils and neighbourhood plans to give added protection to valuable local green spaceswe will support locally-led garden cities and towns and prioritise brownfield development, making sure new homes are always matched by the necessary infrastructure to support themwe will support locally-led garden cities and towns in places where communities want them, such as ebbsfleet and bicester when new homes are granted planning permission, we will make sure local communitiesknow up-front that necessary infrastructure such as schools and roads will be provided we will ensure that brownfield land is used as much as possible for new development we will require local authorities to have a register of what is available, and ensure that 90 per cent52of suitable brownfield sites have planning permission for housing by 2020 to meet the capitals housing needs, we will create a new london land commission, with a mandate to identify and release all surplus brownfield land owned by the public sector we will fund housing zones to transform brownfield sites into new housing, which will create 95,000 new homesaverage council tax bills in england have fallen, in real terms, by 11 per centwe will help keep your council taxes lowunder this government, average council tax bills in england have fallen, in real terms, by 11 per cent whereas labour wants to propose a new tax on family homes, we will help local authorities keep council taxlow for hardworking taxpayers, and ensure residentscan continue to veto high rises via a local referendum and in london, where there is a conservative mayor, bills have fallen even further we will continue to work with councillors to deliver high quality, value for money services we will encourage voluntary integration of services and administration between and within councilsfor example, with the troubled families programme and the better care fund  to promote savings and improve local services we want local councils to help manage public land and buildings, and will give them at least a 10 per cent stake in public sector land sales in their areawe will help you build a strong local economywe want local authorities to help create strong local economies building on the local retention of business rates introduced in 2012, we will promote localism by allowing councils to keep a higher proportion of the business rates revenue that is generated in their area this will provide a strong financial incentive for councils to promote economic growth we will review how we can further reduce ring-fencing and remove whitehall burdens to give councils more flexibility to supportlocal services we will support business improvement districts and other forms of business-led collaboration on high streets  giving more say to local traders on issues such as minor planning applications, cleaning and parking we will continue to support local shops and residents in tackling aggressive parking enforcement and excessive parking charges, and take steps to tackle rogue and unfair practices by private parking operators our coastal communities fund will help our seaside areas thrive, helping to boost skills and create jobsthe conservative party manifesto 2015securing your home and your neighbourhood535. securing your home and your neighbourhoodthe conservative party manifesto 2015protecting and enhancing our natural environmentour commitment to you:we set ourselves the goal of being the first generation to leave the natural environment of england in a better state than that in which we found it. this is a big ambition to which we remain committed. we will:put in place a new blue belt to protect precious marine habitats invest in cleaner air and water for you and your familykeep our forests in trust for the nationfor conservatives, britains green and pleasant land is not some relic from a bygone era, to be mourned and missed: its the living, breathing backdrop to our national life our moors and meadows, wildlife and nature, air and water are a crucial part of our national identity and make our country what it is so we care about them deeply, want to protect them for everyone and pass them onto future generationslabour never understood this our rural communities fell further behind urban areas; biodiversity suffered, with important species and habitats declining under their watch; and they failed to protect the green beltover the last five years, we have committed billions of pounds to reduce emissions from transport and clean up our rivers and seas we have done more to protect our seas, safeguarded our green belt and planted 11 million trees and we set out a comprehensive, long-term vision to protect our natural heritage in this countrys first white paper on the natural environment for 20 yearsover the next five years, we will put in place stronger protections for our natural landscapes, establish a new blue belt to safeguard precious marine habitats, launch a programme of pocket parks in towns and cities and continue to lead in tackling the illegal wildlife trade our plan is to conserve and enhance our natural environment so that this remains the most beautiful country in the worldour plan of action:we will protect your countryside, green belt and urban environmentwe will spend 3 billion from the common agricultural policy to enhance englands countryside over the next five years, enabling us, among other things, to clean up our rivers and lakes, protect our stonewalls and hedges, and help our bees to thrive we will ensure that our public forestsand woodland are kept in trust for the nation and plant another 11 million trees we will make it easier to access our beautiful landscapes, by providing free, comprehensive maps of all open-access green space building on our introduction of a five pence charge on single-use plastic bags, we will review the case for higher fixed penalty notices for littering and allow councils to tackle small-scale fly-tipping through fixed penalties rather than costly prosecutions we will launch an ambitious programme of pocket parks  small areas of inviting public space where people can enjoy relief from the hustle and bustle of city streets we will protect the green belt, and maintain national protections for areas of outstanding natural beauty, national parks, sites of special scientific interest and other environmental designations.we will help you enjoy cleaner air and waterwe will continue to do even more to tackle air pollution and clean up our rivers and waterways, including supporting the thames tideway tunnel we have spent over 3 billion on improving flood defences, and capped the cost of flood insurance. we will now go further, building 1,400 new flood defence schemes, to protect 300,000 homes54the conservative party manifesto 2015we will build new infrastructure in an environmentally-sensitive waywe will build new roads and railways in a way that limits, as far as possible, their impact on the environment this includes investing 300 million in cutting light pollution from new roads, doing more tunnelling, building better noise barriers and helping to restore lost habitat wewill also replace locally any biodiversity lost in the construction of high speed 2 we set up the natural capital committee to put hard economic numbers on the value of our environment, and we will extend its life to at least the end of the next parliament we will work with it to develop a 25 year plan to restore the uks biodiversity, and to ensure that both public and private investment in the environment is directed where we need it mostwe want to protect our environment for future generationswe will create a blue belt to protect precious marine habitatsearlier this year, we announced the creation of a new marine protected area around the pitcairn islands  the largest protected expanse of sea in the world we will now go even further, creating a blue belt around the uks 14 overseas territories, subject to local support and environmental need we will designate a further protected area at ascension island, subject to the views of the local community. and, off our own coasts, we will completethe network of marine conservation zones that we have already started, to create a uk blue belt of protected siteswe will protect animal welfarethe quality of the food on your plate, and the economic security of our farmers, depend on us upholding the highest standards of animal welfare we will push forhigh animal welfare standards to be incorporated into international trade agreements and into reform of the common agricultural policy we will ban wild animals in circuses and press for all eu member states to ensure that animals are only sent to slaughterhouses thatmeet high welfare standards we will encourage other countries to follow the eus lead in banning animal testing for cosmetics and work to accelerate the global development and take-up of alternatives to animal testing where appropriate we want people to integrate fully into british society, but that does not mean they should have to give up the things they hold dear in their religion so while we will always make sure the food standards agency properly regulates the slaughterof livestock and poultry, we will protect methods of religious slaughter, such as shechita and halala record investment in britains flood defences  over 3 billionwe will tackle international wildlife tradeas hosts of the london conference on the illegal wildlife trade, we helped secure the adoption of the london declaration on illegal wildlife trade and will continueto lead the world in stopping the poaching that kills thousands of rhinos, elephants and tigers each year we will oppose any resumption of commercial whaling, and seek further measures at the eu and internationally to end shark-finning. we will promote effective worldwide measures for tuna conservation, press for a total ban on ivory sales, and support the indian government in its efforts to protect the asian elephant. we will press forfull endangered species status for polar bears and a ban on the international trade in polar bear skins, as well as for greater attention to be paid to the impact of climate change on wildlife and habitats in polar regions in the arctic council and other international forasecuring your home and your neighbourhood555. securing your home and your neighbourhoodthe conservative party manifesto 2015guaranteeing you clean, affordable and secure energy suppliesour commitment to you:affordable, reliable energy is critical to our economy, to our national security, and to family budgets. we will:keep your bills as low as possible and promote competition in the energy market ensure your homes and businesses have energy supplies they can rely onhelp you insulate your homehalt the spread of subsidised onshore wind farmsmeet our climate change commitments, cutting carbon emissions as cheaply as possible, to save you moneywithout secure energy supplies, we leave british families and business at the mercy of fluctuating global oil and gas prices; we increase our dependence on foreign sources of energy; and we become less safe and less prosperous as a resultnational energy policy demands a willingness to take decisions today for the good of tomorrow but labour took the opposite approach power margins  the safety cushion we need to prevent blackouts  have fallen to record lows because of their historic failure to investin new capacity domestic sources of oil and gas were unexploited and labour failed to deliver the next generation of energy projects that will help us keep the lights on, drive bills down and reduce carbon emissionsall this hurt consumers the number of major energy suppliers halved and energy bills soared, with the average gas bill more than doublingwe have taken a different approach. where labour was chronically short-termist, we have secured decent, affordable energy supplies not just for the coming years, but for the coming decadesour long-term plan has unlocked 59 billion of investment in electricity all parts of the uk will soon be helping to deliver secure, affordable and low-carbon energy, from the hinkley point nuclear power station, towithout secure energy supplies our country becomes less safe and less prosperousoffshore wind turbine manufacturing at the new green port in hull, the next generation of pipelines west of shetland and the swansea tidal lagoon our tax cuts have encouraged record levels of investment in existing north sea gas, and the birth of a new industry, shale gas, which could create many thousands of jobsand we have delivered a better deal for consumers too we have demanded that energy companies simplify their tariffs; encouraged more independent suppliers  which now account for ten per cent of the household market; and made it much easier for people to switch energy providersbut the job is only half done we need a conservative government to see through this long-term planand secure clean but affordable energy supplies for generations to come. this means a significant expansion in new nuclear and gas; backing good-value green energy; and pushing for more new investment in uk energy sources healthy competition, not short-termist56the conservative party manifesto 2015political intervention, is the best way to secure a good deal for consumers so we will keep on relentlessly pushing for more competition to keep bills lowthis is a long-term plan to keep the lights on; keep our homes warm; and keep families from endless worry about their energy billsunder labour, the average gas bill more than doubledour plan of action:we will promote competition to keep your bills as low as possiblewe have helped increase the number of independent energy suppliers from seven to 21, made it easier for customers to switch to better deals, slashed the numberof tariffs to just 4 per supplier, and cut switching timesin half we will go even further, implementing the recommendations of the competition and markets authority investigation that we triggered we will ensure that every home and business in the country has a smart meter by 2020, delivered as cost-effectively as possible,so consumers have instant, accurate bills and can switch to an alternative provider within one day and we will support low-cost measures on energy efficiency, with the goal of insulating a million more homes over the next five years, supporting our commitment to tackle fuel povertywe will secure your energy supplieswe will continue to support the safe development of shale gas, and ensure that local communities share thewe want a better deal  and low bills  for hardworking families3.1 million people are now on better energy tariffsproceeds through generous community benefit packages. we will create a sovereign wealth fund for the northof england, so that the shale gas resources of the north are used to invest in the future of the north we will continue to support development of north sea oil and gas we will provide start-up funding for promising new renewable technologies and research, but will only give significant support to those that clearly represent value for moneywe will halt the spread of onshore windfarmsonshore wind now makes a meaningful contributionto our energy mix and has been part of the necessary increase in renewable capacity onshore windfarms often fail to win public support, however, and are unable by themselves to provide the firm capacity that a stable energy system requires as a result, we will end any new public subsidy for them and change the law so that local people have the final say on windfarm applications.we will protect our planet for our childrenwe have been the greenest government ever, settingup the worlds first green investment bank, signing a deal to build the first new nuclear plant in a generation, trebling renewable energy generation to 19 per cent, bringing energy efficiency measures to over one million homes, and committing 1 billion for carbon capture and storage. we are the largest offshore wind marketin the world we will push for a strong global climate deal later this year  one that keeps the goal of limiting global warming to two-degrees firmly in reach. at home, we will continue to support the uk climate change act. we will cut emissions as cost-effectively as possible, and will not support additional distorting and expensive power sector targetssecuring your home and your neighbourhood575. securing your home and your neighbourhoodthe conservative party manifesto 2015fighting crime and standing up for victimsour commitment to you:your local area should be a safe place to grow up, work, raise a family and retire. we will continue to cut crime and make your community safer. we will:finish the job of police reform, so you can have more confidence that your local policing team is working effectivelytoughen sentencing and reform the prison system, so dangerous criminals are kept off your streetssupport victims, so that the most vulnerable in our society get the support they deserve.scrap the human rights act and curtail the role of the european court of human rights, so that foreign criminals can be more easily deported from britain.crime is down by more than 20 per cent since 2010, according to the independent crime survey, and is at its lowest point since records began lower crime means fewer robberies, less violence on our streets, fewer lives ruined, and more people able to feel confident about the futurelabour didnt trust our brilliant policemen and women, probation staff and prison officers to do their job, but tried to micromanage every police force from whitehall, doing serious damage to officer morale, police discretion and forces performance and labour failed to provide sufficient prison places: tens of thousands of prisoners were released early, putting the public at riskwe have made progress in turning around the situation we inherited, with comprehensive reforms to policing, rehabilitation and the rights of victims we have already increased the proportion of officers working on the frontline, and cut 45 million hours of police paperwork we have given chief constables a clear mandate to cut crime, reformed stop and search, established the national crime agency, strengthened the police inspectorate, made the police more accountable through police and crime commissioners, increased transparency through crime maps, and set up the college of policing to drive up professional standardswe have made sure that 45,000 offenders will now receive supervision and rehabilitation on release from prison,with providers paid according to the results they achieve in reducing reoffending. we reformed drug treatment so that abstinence and full recovery is the goal, instead of the routine maintenance of peoples addictions with substitute drugs and with new laws to crack down on domestic violence, measures to prevent female genital mutilationcrime has been cut by more than a fifth(fgm), the first ever modern slavery act, action to tackle human trafficking and substantial progress in tackling online child abuse, we have consistently stood up for the most vulnerable in our societywe will carry on making every community safer, even when resources are tight we will continue reducing paperwork, increasing sentence lengths for the most serious offences, and making sure that prisons are places of rehabilitationwe need to complete our revolution in the way we manage offenders in the community, using the latest technology to keep criminals on the straight and narrow and we must also become smarter when it comes to crime prevention, dealing with the drivers of crime such as drugs and alcohol so we will focus not only on punishment, but also58on rehabilitating offenders and intervening early to prevent troubled young people being drawn into crimeour plan of action:we will finish the job of police reform, backing officers to fight crime unimpededwe will ensure proper provision of health and community- based places of safety for people suffering mental health crises  saving police time and stopping vulnerable people being detained in police custody to speed up justice, we will extend the use of police-led prosecutions we will allow police forces to retain a greater percentage of the valueof assets they seize from criminals. we will improve our response to cyber-crime with reforms to police training and an expansion in the number of volunteer cyber specials we will enable fire and police services to work moreclosely together and develop the role of our elected and accountable police and crime commissionerswe will transform the relationship between the police and the publicwe have taken action to boost public confidence and trust in the police and now want to go even further we will improve the diversity of police recruitment  especiallyof black and ethnic minority officers  by supportingthe development of new direct entry and fast-track schemes such as police now, which offers top graduatesa new route into policing we will overhaul the police complaints system we will use the police innovation fund to accelerate the adoption of new technologies, including mobile devices, that will transform the service the public receives and we will legislate to mandate changes in police practices if stop and search does not become more targeted and stop to arrest ratios do not improvewe will introduce more effective crime prevention measures to break the cycle of offendingwe are developing a modern crime prevention strategy to address the key drivers of crime we will publish standards, performance data and a ranking system for the security of smartphones and tablets, as well as online financial and retail services. we will overhaul the system of police cautions, and ensure that offenders alwayshave conditions, such as victim redress, attached to their punishment we will create a blanket ban on all new psychoactive substances, protecting young people from exposure to so-called legal highs and we will make sobriety orders available to all courts in england and wales, enforced through new alcohol monitoring tagswe will reform our prison systemdespite making savings in the prison budget, there are around 3,000 more adult male prison places today than in 2010. we will make further savings by closing old, inefficient prisons, building larger, modern and fit-for-purpose ones and expanding payment-by-results and we will introduce widespread random testing of drug use in jails, new body scanners, greater use of mobile phone blocking technology and a new strategy to tackle corruption in prisonsthere are around 3,000 more adult male prison places today than in 2010we will protect victims and support the vulnerablewe have already introduced a new victims code and taken steps to protect vulnerable witnesses and victims now we will strengthen victims rights further, witha new victims law that will enshrine key rights for victims, including the right to make a personal statement and have it read in court before sentencing  and before the parole board decides on a prisoner's release wewill give all vulnerable victims and witnesses greater opportunity to give evidence outside court, and roll out nationally pre-trial cross examination for child victimswe will prioritise tackling violence against women and girlswe have made protecting women and girls from violence and supporting victims and survivors of sexual violence a key priority we will now work with local authorities, the nhs and police and crime commissioners to ensure a secure future for specialist fgm and forced marriage units, refuges and rape crisis centres we will ensure that all publicly-fundedthe conservative party manifesto 2015securing your home and your neighbourhood595. securing your home and your neighbourhoodthe conservative party manifesto 2015advocates have specialist victims' training before becoming involved in serious sexual offences cases. we have set up an independant statutory inquiry into child sexual abuse, and will make sure it can challange institutions and individuals without fear or favour, and get to the truth and we will continue the urgent work of overhauling how our police, social services and other agencies work together to protect vulnerable children, especially from the kind of organised grooming and sexual exploitation that has come to light in rotherham, and other towns and cities across the ukwe will toughen sentencing and use new technology to protect the publicwe will continue to reform the way we rehabilitate prisoners we will deploy new technology to monitor offenders in the community and to bring persistent offenders to justice more quickly. a new semi-custodial sentence will be introduced for prolific criminals, allowing for a short, sharp spell in custody to change behaviourto tackle those cases where judges get it wrong, we will extend the scope of the unduly lenient scheme, so a wider range of sentences can be challenged we will review the legislation governing hate crimes, including the case for extending the scope of the law to cover crimes committed against people on the basis of disability, sexualorientation or transgender identity we will improvethe treatment of women offenders, exploring how new technology may enable more women with young children to serve their sentence in the communitywe will reform human rights law and our legal systemwe have stopped prisoners from having the vote, and have deported suspected terrorists such as abu qatada, despite all the problems created by labours human rights laws the next conservative government will scrap the human rights act, and introduce a british bill of rights this will break the formal link between british courts and the european court of human rights, and make our own supreme court the ultimate arbiter of human rights matters in the uk we will continue the 375 million modernisation of our courts system, reducing delay and frustration for the public and we will continue to review our legal aid systems, so they can continue to provide access to justice in an efficient way.we will scrap the human rights act and introduce a british bill of rights60the conservative party manifesto 2015preventing terrorism, countering extremismour commitment to you:keeping you and your family safe is our overriding priority. the threat of extremism and terrorism remains serious, but with our tough, intelligent and comprehensive approach, we will confront and ultimately defeat it. we will:strengthen the ability of the police and intelligence agencies to disrupt terrorist plots, so the authorities have all the tools they need to prevent attacksdeal with online radicalisation and propaganda, so we can reduce the risk of young people being drawn into extremism and terrorismtackle all forms of extremism, including non-violent extremism, so our values and our way of life are properly promoted and defendedthe first duty of government is to keep you safe. we will always do whatever is necessary to protect the british people we have protected and increased the budgets for the security and intelligence agencies and counter-terrorism policing but the scale of the threat to our country from a number of terrorist groups remains serious, and the rise of isil in syria and iraq has created new havens for terrorists from which attacks against britain can be planned, financed and directed.we will always do whatever is necessary to protect the british peoplehowever, the nature of the threat we face is makingit more difficult for the security services to identify terrorist plots  especially thanks to new technology we must always ensure our outstanding intelligence and security agencies have the powers they need to keepus safe at the same time, we continue to reject any suggestions of sweeping, authoritarian measures that would threaten our hard-won freedoms in the last year alone, we have given the authorities greater powers to disrupt and control the movements of people who want to travel abroad to fight, including strengthening powers to confiscate the passports of those seeking to travel to commit terrorismthe next conservative government will continue to take a tough, intelligent and comprehensive approach to preventing terrorism and confronting extremism we will update our counter-terrorism laws wherever necessary to make sure they properly reflect the threats we faceabu hamza and abu qatada removed from this country once and for alldealing with these threats is not just about new powers it is about how we combat extremism in all its forms we need to tackle it at root, before it takes the formof violence and terror at the heart of our approach lies an uncompromising defence of british values,and a very simple message: in britain, you do not just enjoy the freedom to live how you choose; you have a responsibility to respect others tooour plan of action:we will strengthen counter-terrorism powerswe have strengthened counter-terrorism laws, including making it easier to stop british nationals travellingsecuring your home and your neighbourhood615. securing your home and your neighbourhoodthe conservative party manifesto 201562abroad to fight, and control the return of those who do we will keep up to date the ability of the police and security services to access communications data  the who, where, when and how of a communication,but not its content our new communications data legislation will strengthen our ability to disrupt terrorist plots, criminal networks and organised child grooming gangs, even as technology develops we will maintain the ability of the authorities to intercept the contentof suspects communications, while continuing to strengthen oversight of the use of these powerswe will confront all forms of extremism, including non-violent extremismwe have already reformed the prevent strategy so that it focuses on non-violent as well as violent extremism we will now go even further we will outlaw groups that foment hate with the introduction of new banning orders for extremist organisations these could be applied to dangerous organisations that fall shortof the existing thresholds for proscription underover 75,000 pieces of unlawful material have been taken down from the internetterrorism legislation to restrict the harmful activities of extremist individuals, we will create new extremism disruption orders these new powers might, for instance, prevent those who are seeking to radicalise young british people online from using the internetor communicating via social media we will develop a strategy to tackle the infiltration of extremists into our schools and public services we will strengthen ofcoms role so that tough measures can be taken against channels that broadcast extremist contentwe will enable employers to check whether an individual is an extremist and bar them from working with children and we will take further measuresto ensure colleges and universities do not give a platform to extremist speakersthe conservative party manifesto 2015securing your home and your neighbourhood635. securing your home and your neighbourhoodthe conservative party manifesto 201564 securing a better future for you, your family and britainthe conservative party manifesto 2015dignity in your retirementour commitment to you:if you have worked hard during your life, saved, paid your taxes and done the right thing, you deserve dignity and security when you retire. we want britain to be the best country in which to grow old. we will:take the family home out of inheritance tax for all but the richest by raising the effective threshold for married couples and civil partners to 1 millioncontinue to increase the state pension through our triple lock, so it rises by at least 2.5 per cent, inflation or earnings, whichever is highestreward saving by introducing a new single-tier pensiongive you the freedom to invest and spend your pension however you like  and let youpass it on to your loved ones tax-freeprotect pensioner benefits including the free bus pass, tv licences and winter fuel paymentensure britain has a strong economy, so we can continue to protect the nhs and make sure no-one is forced to sell their home to pay for care.our pensioners have made this country what it is, and we believe that, in return, younger generations owe it to them to ensure they have dignity and security in their old agein office, labour neglected the elderly. they raided pensions with a 150 billion stealth tax one year they increased pensions by a paltry 75 pence and theydid nothing to give people control over their savingsand pensions, or to stop them from having to sell their homes to pay for care in place of these meagre pension increases, we have introduced the triple lock: the basic state pension will now always rise in line with whichever is higher  earnings, inflation or 2.5 per cent. since 2010, we have seen the basic pension has risen in value by 950 we have abolished the default retirement age, so you can keep working as long as you like wewe are building a britain where everyone who has worked hard and done the right thing can enjoy security in retirementare replacing the pension credit  basically a means test  with a new single-tier pension: whatever people save, they will keep and we have introduced a capon residential social care costs: no one will have to sell their home to pay for care on top of all this, we have scrapped compulsory annuities, giving people complete control over their pension pots; kept all pensioner benefits; and protected nhs spending.in the next five years, as our country recovers andour elderly population grows, we will continue to put pensioners at the heart of our long-term economic planour plan of action:we will look after you as you grow olderwe will cap charges for residential social carefrom april 2016 and also allow deferred payment agreements, so no one has to sell their home for the first time, individual liabilities will be limited, giving everyone the peace of mind that they will receivethe care they need, and that they will be protected from unlimited costs if they develop very serious caredignity in your retirement656. dignity in your retirementthe conservative party manifesto 201566 securing a better future for you, your family and britainthe conservative party manifesto 2015we will continue to increase the basic state pension through our triple lock guaranteeneeds  such as dementia we will protect the nhs budget and we will prioritise funding for dementia researchwe will guarantee your financial security as you grow olderwe will keep the triple lock pension system from april 2016 we are bringing in a single tier pension; this will effectively abolish means-testing the pensions of people who have contributed all their lives we will maintainall the current pensioner benefits including winter fuel payments, free bus passes, free prescriptions and tv licences for the next parliament, while implementingthe "temperature test" for winter fuel payment, so that expats in hot countries no longer receive it and we will allow pensioners to access their pension savings and decide whether or not to take out an annuity, so they can make their own decisions about their moneywe will help you support your loved-oneswe have guaranteed that isas can now be passed on to a spouse tax-free, so that from this april they are no longer subject to income tax and capital gains tax we have abolished the 55 per cent tax on pension pots, so that when the deceased is 75 or over any beneficiary only has to pay their marginal income tax rate  normally 20 per cent  when they draw down the pension and we have enabled anyone who dies before the age of 75 to pass on their pension pot completely tax-free, so that beneficiaries will pay no tax on pensions they inherit or on the income they draw down and we will take the family home outof tax for all but the richest by increasing the effective inheritance tax threshold for married couples and civil partners to 1 million, with a new transferable main residence allowance of 175,000 per person thiswill be paid for by reducing the tax relief on pension contributions for people earning more than 150,000its your money, you worked hard for it  and you should be able to pass it onto your loved-onesdignity in your retirement676. dignity in your retirementthe conservative party manifesto 201568 securing a better future for you, your family and britainthe conservative party manifesto 2015stronger together: a union for the 21st centuryour commitment to you:wherever you live in the great nations of our united kingdom, we are on your side. we will:give english mps a veto over matters only affecting england, including on income taxhonour in full our commitments to scotland to devolve extensive new powersimplement the agreed settlement for wales, handing over more responsibility to the welsh assemblycontinue to build a northern ireland where politics works, the economy grows and society is strong.england, scotland, wales and northern ireland  ours is the greatest union of nations the world has ever seen together we have done so much, and we can do much more the conservative party is the party of the union  and we will always do our utmost to keep our family of nations togetherit was right to create the scottish parliament and welsh assembly, but the job was not finished. without the ability to raise money, the devolved parliaments were not accountable to taxpayers without devolution to local councils and communities, power felt as distant as ever and one fundamental unfairness remains today: scottish mps are able to cast the decisive vote on matters that only affected england and wales, while english and welsh mps cannot vote on matters that only affect scotland this leaves a space for resentment to fester  and put our union in jeopardywe have tackled the problems we inherited first, we held the referendum on scottish independence it was the right thing to do, and the question of scotlands place in the united kingdom is now settled we have made the scottish parliament and welsh assembly responsible for funding more of what they spend we have agreed with northern irelands parties a deal to help ensure that politics works, the economy grows and society is more cohesive and united and we have set out clear plans for english votes for english lawsall this reflects a core conservative belief: power to the people around britain you can see that principle in practicein town halls, councillors now have more of a say over public spending in communities, local people have the right tovote in referendums on council tax rises neighbourhoods are deciding what is built in their area and what happens to assets such as parks and public buildingswe believe in giving power to hardworking taxpayers, letting you decide on the issues that affect you and your familyour commitment to the union means we want to strengthen it we will let local people have more say on local planning and let them vote on local issues we will not let anyone impose artificial regions on england  our traditional towns, boroughs, cities and counties are here to stay we will continue devolution settlementsfor scotland and wales, and implement the stormont house agreement in northern ireland and we will give english mps a veto over english-only matters, including on income tax  answering the west lothian questionin the last five years, we have proven that we are the party of the union we will go further in the next parliament, pushing power out beyond westminster, cardiff bay, holyrood and stormont, so we keep our united kingdom strong and secure for the long termkeeping our country secure697. keeping our country securethe conservative party manifesto 2015our plan of action:we will build an enduring settlement for the united kingdomwe will work to ensure a stable constitution that is fair to the people of england, scotland, wales, and northern ireland we will strengthen and improve devolutionfor each part of our united kingdom in a way that accepts that there is no one-size-fits-all solution: we will implement the smith commission and st davids day agreement or equivalent changes in the rest of the uk, including english votes for english lawswe will give english mps a veto over matters only affecting englandwe will maintain the westminster parliament as the uk and englands law-making body but we want parliament to work in a way that ensures decisions affecting england,or england and wales, can only be taken with the consent of the majority of mps representing constituencies in england, or in england and wales we will end the manifest unfairness whereby scotland is able to decide its own laws in devolved areas, only for scottish mps also to be able to have the potentially decisive say on similar matters that affect only england and wales we will maintain the integrity of the uk parliament by ensuring that mps from all parts of the uk continue to deliberate and vote together, including to set overall spending levels but we will:change parliamentary procedures so that the detail of legislation affecting only england or england and wales will be considered by a committee drawn in proportion to party strength in england or england and walesadd a new stage to how english legislation is passed; no bill or part of a bill relating only to england would be able to pass to its third reading and become law without being approved through a legislative consent motion by a grand committee made up of all english mps, or all english and welsh mpsextend the principle of english consent to financial matters such as how spending is distributed within england and to taxation  including an english rate of income tax  when the equivalent decisions have been devolved to scotlandwe will honour in full our commitments to scotlanda new scotland bill will be in our first queens speech and will be introduced in the first session of a new parliament. we will implement the recommendations of the smith commission so that more than 50 per cent of the scottish parliaments budget will be funded from revenues raised in scotland and it will have significant new welfare powers to complement existing devolved powers in health and social care we will provide the scottish parliament with one of the most extensive packages of tax and spending powersof any devolved legislature in the world we will retain the barnett formula as the basis for determining the grantto cover that part of the scottish parliaments budget not funded by tax revenues raised in scotland we will agree new rules with the scottish government for how the block grant will be adjusted, to take account of the new devolved tax and welfare powers and we will ensure that where responsibility for taxation has been devolved, tax changes only affect public spending in that part of the country.we will implement wales devolution settlementwe will clarify the division of powers between wales and the uk government we will:devolve to the welsh assembly control over its own affairs  including the assembly name, size and electoral system, assembly elections and voting ageimplement other recommendations of the second silk report where there is all-party support as set out in the st davids day agreement; this will include devolving to the welsh assembly important economic powers over ports and energy consentsintroduce a new wales bill if these changes require legislationcontinue to reserve policing and justice as matters for the uk parliamentintroduce a funding floor to protect welsh relative funding and provide certainty for the welsh government to plan for the future, once it has called a referendum on income tax powers in the next parliament70the conservative party manifesto 2015make the welsh government responsible for raising more of the money it spends so the welsh people can hold their politicians to accountwe will continue to build a northern ireland where politics works, the economy grows and society is strongwe will maintain northern irelands position within the united kingdom on the basis of the consent of its people our strong support for the political institutions established over the past two decades as a result of the various agreements will continue we will:put the safety and security of the people of northern ireland as our highest priority we will develop and implement our strategy to combat terrorism, giving the strongest possible support to the brave men andwomen of the police service of northern irelandwork to implement fully and faithfully the historic stormont house agreement to enable devolution to function more effectively; to deal with the legacy of the past; and to make progress on divisive issues such as flags and parading.continue to work closely with the northern ireland executive to implement commitments in the 2013 economic pact to rebalance the economy and to build a more united and stronger societycomplete the devolution of corporation tax powers to the assembly, consistent with the executive fulfilling its commitments on finance, welfare reform and efficiencies in the stormont house agreement.keeping our country secure717. keeping our country securethe conservative party manifesto 2015real change in our relationship with the european unionour commitment to you:for too long, your voice has been ignored on europe. we will:give you a say over whether we should stay in or leave the eu, with an in-out referendumby the end of 2017commit to keeping the pound and staying out of the eurozonereform the workings of the eu, which is too big, too bossy and too bureaucraticreclaim power from brussels on your behalf and safeguard british interests in the single marketback businesses to create jobs in britain by completing ambitious trade deals and reducing red tape.the eu needs to change and it is time for the british people  not politicians  to have their say only the conservative party will deliver real change and real choice on europe, with an in-out referendum by the end of 2017labour failed to give you a choice on the eu they handed over major new powers to brussels withoutyour consent, and gave away 7 billion of the british rebate we have taken action in europe to promote your economic security. we cut the eu budget for the firsttime ever, saving british taxpayers 815 billion we took britain out of eurozone bailouts, including for greece  the first ever return of powers from brussels. our prime minister vetoed a new eu treaty that would have damaged britains interests and we have pursued a bold, positive, pro-business agenda, exempting smallest businesses from red tape, promoting free trade, and pushing to extend the single market to new sectors, like digitalwe believe in letting the people decide: so we will hold an in-out referendum on our membership of the eu before the end of 2017but there is much more to do the eu is too bureaucratic and too undemocratic it interferes too much in ourdaily lives, and the scale of migration triggered by new members joining in recent years has had a real impact on local communities we are clear about what we want from europe we say: yes to the single market yes to turbo- charging free trade yes to working together where we are stronger together than alone yes to a family of nation states, all part of a european union  but whose interests, crucially, are guaranteed whether inside the euro or out no to ever closer union. no to a constant flow of power to brussels no to unnecessary interference and no, of course, to the euro, to participation in eurozone bail-outs or notions like a european armyit will be a fundamental principle of a future conservative government that membership of the european union depends on the consent of the british people  and in recent years that consent has worn wafer-thin thats why, after the election, we will negotiate a new settlement for britain in europe, and then ask the british people whether they want to stay in the eu on this reformed basis or leave david cameron has committed that he will only lead a government that offers an in-out referendum. we will hold that in-out referendum before the end of 2017 and respect the outcomeso the choice at this election is clear: labour and the72liberal democrats wont give you a say over the eu ukip cant give you a say only the conservativeparty will deliver real change in europe  and only the conservatives can and will deliver an in-out referendumour plan of action:we will let you decide whether to stay in or leave the euwe will legislate in the first session of the next parliament for an in-out referendum to be held on britains membership of the eu before the end of 2017 we will negotiate a new settlement for britain in the eu and then we will ask the british people whether they want to stayin on this basis, or leave we will honour the result of the referendum, whatever the outcomewe will protect britain's economywe will protect our economy from any further integration of the eurozone. the integration of the eurozone has raised acute questions for non-eurozone countries like the united kingdom. we benefit from the single market and do not want to stand in the way of the eurozone resolving its difficulties. indeed, given the trade between britain and the eurozone countries we want to see these economies returning to growth but we will not let the integration of the eurozone jeopardise the integrity of the single market or in any way disadvantage the ukwe will reclaim powers from brusselswe want to see powers flowing away from brussels, notto it we have already taken action to return around 100 powers, but we want to go further we want national parliaments to be able to work together to block unwanted european legislation and we want an end to our commitment to an ever closer union, as enshrined indavid cameron vetoed a new eu treaty that would have damaged britains interests  the first time in history that a british prime minister has done sothe treaty to which every eu country has to sign up furthermore, we will continue to ensure that defence policy remains firmly under british national control, maintaining nato and the transatlantic relationship as the cornerstones of our defence and security policywe will scrap the human rights actwe will scrap labour's human rights act and introducea british bill of rights which will restore common senseto the application of human rights in the uk the billwill remain faithful to the basic principles of humanrights, which we signed up to in the original european convention on human rights it will protect basic rights, like the right to a fair trial, and the right to life, which are an essential part of a modern democratic society but it will reverse the mission creep that has meant human rights law being used for more and more purposes, and often with little regard for the rights of wider society among other things the bill will stop terrorists and other serious foreign criminals who pose a threat to our society from using spurious human rights arguments to prevent deportationwe will take action in europe to make you better offwe want an eu that helps britain move ahead, notone that holds us back we have already succeededin exempting our smallest businesses from new eu regulations, and kicked-off negotiations for a massiveeu trade deal with the usa, which could be worth billions of pounds to the uk economy we will buildon this we want to preserve the integrity of the single market, by insisting on protections for those countries that have kept their own currencies we want to expand the single market, breaking down the remaining barriers to trade and ensuring that new sectors are openedup to british firms. we want to ensure that new rules target unscrupulous behaviour in the financial services industry, while safeguarding britain as a global centre of excellence in finance. so we will resist eu attempts to restrict legitimate financial services activities. we will press for lower eu spending, further reform of the common agricultural policy and structural funds, and for eu money to be focused on promoting jobs and growththe conservative party manifesto 2015keeping our country secure737. keeping our country securethe conservative party manifesto 2015a britain standing tall in the worldour commitment to you:everything we do around the world will be driven by a determination to protect your security and help you prosper. we will:ensure britain is a major player on the world stage, using diplomacy to protect your interests, uphold british values and tackle threats to your security and prosperityhelp generate new trade, investment and job opportunities, to benefit you and your family maintain our world class armed forces so they continue to guarantee your securityuphold our commitment to spend 0.7 per cent of gross national income on international development.economic security and national security are two sidesof the same coin without one, you cannot have the other our prosperity depends upon britain remaining an active, outward-looking nation, one that is engaged with the world, not looking in on itself we will maintain britains strong global role and our capacity to project british power and values around the worldwe want a strong, secure and stable countrylabours great recession weakened britain on the world stage they left a 38 billion black hole in the defence budget, went 12 years without conductinga strategic defence review, and, at times, failed to provide our armed forces with the equipment they needed in afghanistan they shut down over 30british diplomatic missions, failed to plan properly for iraqs reconstruction, ignored trade and investment opportunities overseas, and neglected vital relationshipswe have strengthened britains influence in the world. the national security council that we established ensures proper, strategic decision-making at the top of government we have boosted exports to emerging markets, opened new diplomatic posts in africa, asia and latin america, and led the worldin promoting womens rights and tackling sexual violence in conflict. we have balanced the defence budget and set out a clear strategy to defend our nation for the long termwe and our allies face major challenges: islamist extremism, an aggressive russia, economic uncertainty in the eurozone, nuclear proliferation and infectious diseases a conservative government will tackle these challenges we will use our membership of nato, the eu, the commonwealth, our un security council seat, our special relationship with the usa, our intelligence agencies, vital institutions like the bbc world service and british council, and the strong personal links between our diaspora communities and other countries, to achieve the best for britainonly with a strong economy can we maintain our world- class armed forces and protect our national securitywe will back this up with uk military power and international aid our long-term economic plan will ensure we have the economic strength to maintain our world-class armed forces, to uphold our national security and project power globally aid helps prevent failed states from becoming havens for terroristsit builds long-term markets for our businesses, by promoting global prosperity, and reduces migration pressures so we will maintain our commitment to tackling conflict, poverty and disease around the world.keeping our country secure757. keeping our country secureour plan of action:we will keep you securewe will tackle global terrorism and the poisonous ideology of islamist extremism while taking a patient, long-term approach to preventing conflict and state failure we will work with our partners to address threats to uk security, including the spread of nuclear, chemical and biological weapons, pandemic diseases, the illegal drugs trade, piracy and organised crime we will:work for peace, stability and an inclusive settlement in syria and iraq; and pursue a comprehensive political and military strategy to defeat isiluphold the sovereignty, integrity and capacity of ukraine, and continue to reject russias illegal annexation of crimeastand shoulder to shoulder with our nato allies, reassuring all its members  especially those closest to russia  of their security, and continue to support the euro-atlantic path for western balkan nationsensure that the significant achievements of our armed forces in afghanistan are maintained; and support the government of afghanistan in ensuring that the country remains stable and never again becomes a haven for international terroristssupport a two-state solution to the israeli-palestinian conflict, robustly defending the right of israel to protect its security, while continuing to condemn illegal settlement building, which undermines the prospects for peaceprotect global security by helping to lead international efforts to prevent iran from obtaining a nuclear weapon; and work to ensure that north korea ends its development of nuclear weaponswe will help make you better offover the last five years, we have used foreign policy toboost our prosperity uk exports to china have morethan doubled since 2009 we will do more, using the new embassies and diplomatic posts we have opened to connect britain to the fastest-growing economies in the world we will push for freer global trade, concluding major trade deals with the us, india and japan and reinvigorating the world trade organisation as part of our drive to attract more investment into the uk and increase british exports, we will:build on our strong relationship with india, pushfor an ambitious eu-india trade deal and support indias bid for permanent representation on the un security councilstrengthen our economic links with china, doubling support for british firms selling goods there and championing an eu-china trade dealuk exports to china have more than doubled since 2009we will stand up for british valuesour long-term security and prosperity depend on a stable international system that upholds our values over the last five years, we have stood up for what we believe in: intervening to stop a massacre in libya, leading the world in tackling sexual violence in conflict, and helping women and children who have fled violence in syria we will continue this leadership we willstand up for the freedom of people of all religionsand non-religious people  to practise their beliefs in peace and safety, for example by supporting persecuted christians in the middle east we will strengthen the commonwealths focus on promoting democratic values and development we will drive forward the preventing sexual violence in conflict initiative. we will support global processes on arms control and we will continue to support universal human rights we will:uphold our special relationship with the usa and further strengthen our ties with our closethe conservative party manifesto 2015a stronger voice for our nation on the world stage76commonwealth allies, australia, canada and new zealanduphold the democratic rights of the people of gibraltar and the falkland islands to remain british, for as long as that is their wish, and protect our overseas territoriesstand up for the rule of law and human rights in zimbabwekeeping britain safeour plan of action:we will protect our nationwe will continue to keep our armed forces strong so they can continue to keep you safe. we will maintain the size of the regular armed services and not reduce the armyto below 82,000 we will retain the trident continuous at sea nuclear deterrent to provide the ultimate guaranteeof our safety and build the new fleet of four successor ballistic missile submarines  securing thousands of highly-skilled engineering jobs in the uk we will work closely with our allies to continue to strengthen nato supporting its new multi-national rapid response force we will maintain our global presence, strengthening our defence partnerships in the gulf and asia later this year, we will hold a national security strategy and strategic defence and security review to plan for the futurewe will maintain a balanced defence budget and give our armed forces the equipment they needwe can only have strong, well-funded armed forces by continuing to build a stronger economy we have the second largest defence budget in nato and the largest in the eu we are meeting natos two targets: that each country should spend two per cent of its gross national income on defence, and of that spending 20 per cent should go on major equipment we have made commitments for the equipment plan to be funded at one per cent above inflation for the next parliament we plan to invest at least 160 billion in new military equipment over the next decade: as well as our six new type 45 destroyers, we are building asupport a democratic transition in burmapromote reconciliation and human rights in sri lanka, including through supporting the un investigation into war crimes, which the prime minister was instrumental in securing following his historic visit to jaffnaactively support cypriots to find a peaceful and lasting settlement to reunite their islandclass of seven astute submarines and buying the joint strike fighter, scout armoured vehicles, type 26 frigates andnew apache attack helicopters we will bring both of our new aircraft carriers  hms queen elizabeth and hms prince of wales, the largest vessels the royal navy has ever possessed  into service, so we have one available for use at all times we will continue to seek value for money in defence procurement, recognising the important contribution that the uk defence industry makes to our prosperitywe have the biggest defence budget in the eu  and the second biggest in natowe will maintain strong, modern armed forcesmodern, flexible armed forces need strong reserve capacity, alongside strong regular forces. we have invested significantly in our reserves, and we will deliver on our commitmentto expand them to 35,000 we will continue to invest inour cyber defence capabilities we will also provide more opportunities for talented people from all communities and walks of life to serve their country we will ensure our armed forces overseas are not subject to persistent human rights claims that undermine their ability to do their jobwe will do all we can to honour those who give so muchthe conservative party manifesto 2015keeping our country secure777. keeping our country securewe will continue to honour the armed forces covenantwe have honoured our commitment to enshrine the armed forces covenant in law and done much to support our servicemen and women we have delivered better accommodation for service families, helped service personnel buy their own home, and ensured that children of members of the armed forces benefit from the pupil premium we have delivered proper mental health support and priority access to medical treatments for veterans to ensure that those who serve can enjoy greater economic security, we have boosted allowances and tax reliefs we have protected pensions for our servicemen and women we have ensured that injured service personnel have access to the latest prosthetics andworld-class rehabilitation facilities and we have used 450 million of libor fines from banks to support the armed forces community the money has been usedto support a wide range of charities and good causes, from providing better play facilities for the children of service families, to helping rehabilitation through sport for injured veterans we pressed for the introduction of the arctic star medal  for veterans of the arctic convoys and the bomber command clasp, to ensure proper recognition for those who risked their lives to keep us free we will build on this proud record, implementing lord ashcrofts recommendations on the way the nation fulfils its obligations to veterans we will work to address hearing loss among veterans and we will continue to supportthe unsung heroes of the armed forces community: the partners and families of those who serveour plan of action:we will continue to honour our commitmentstackling global poverty is both the right thing to do and in britains interests we have delivered on our promises to meet the un target of spending 07 per cent of national income as aid and to enshrine this in law we will continue to meet the 07 per cent target, maintain an independent department for international development and keep aid untied our aid budget meets the oecd aid rules, and we will actively engage in international discussions to ensure that these rules fully reflect the importance of peace, stability and effective institutions for reducing poverty. we will insist that every government and organisation we fund meets global transparency standardswe will save livesby 2020, we will save 14 million childrens lives, by immunising 76 million children against killer diseases we will help at least 11 million children in the poorest countries gain a decent education, improve nutrition for at least 50 million people, who would otherwise go hungry; and help at least 60 million people get accessby 2020, we will save 1.4 million children's livesto clean water and sanitation, to stop terrible diseases we will continue to lead the response to humanitarian emergencies, and establish a means to respond rapidly to crises our leading role in dealing with the recent outbreak of ebola in west africa is a good exampleof how our aid programme helps protect britain from serious threats, while also helping countries tackle major emergencies which put their stability at risk we will lead a major new global programme to accelerate the development of vaccines and drugs to eliminate the worlds deadliest infectious diseases, while investing to save lives from malaria and working to end preventable child and maternal deaths we will expand payment by results and ensure all money to governments is clearly earmarked for specific purposes.we will tackle the causes of poverty and promote gender equalitywe will push for new global goals to eradicate extreme poverty by 2030 and promote human development,the conservative party manifesto 2015tackling global challenges to make you safer and more prosperous78gender equality and good governance we will workto prevent climate change and assist the poorest in adapting to it as the route out of poverty is about much more than just aid, we will boost growth andjobs, making it easier for people to start up businesses and trade freely with each other we will continue to promote the golden thread of democracy, the rule of law, property rights, a free media and open, accountable institutions we will promote girls education, encourage equal access to property rights and work to achieve access to family planning for everyone who wants it we will continue to lead efforts to tackle violence against women and girls, end fgm and combat early andforced marriage, both at home and abroadwe will help you fight povertyour international citizen service has given thousands of young brits the opportunity to volunteer abroad we will triple it in size. we will also double our successful aid match scheme, which matches donations tocharity from the aid budget we will boost partnerships between uk institutions and their counterparts in the developing world, and help people in the uk give or lend money directly to individuals and entrepreneurs around the worldthe conservative party manifesto 2015keeping our country secure797. keeping our country securethe conservative party manifesto 201580 securing a better future for you, your family and britainthe conservative party manifesto 2015conclusionso this is our detailed plan for britain.our plan to entrench the progress of the past five years. our plan for you and your family, at every stage of your lifeit is underpinned by some simple conservative values.those who work hard and do the right thing must be rewarded everyone should be able to rise as high as their talents and effort will take them. we measure our success not just in how we show our strength abroad, but in how we care for the weakest and most vulnerable at homeabove all, running through this plan is a true belief in britain.in the past five years, as so often before in our history, we have once againdefied the expectations of the world to rise up and meet our challenges. the british character is renewed every day by the millions who work hard, raise their families, care for those who need help, who do the right thing  and make this country what it isthis manifesto is about improving the lives of each and every one of these people.together we have come so far if we stick to our long-term plan, we can securea better future for you and your family so let us keep moving forward; and set our sights on making our great country greater still81promoted by alan mabbutt on behalf of the conservative party, both at 4 matthew parker street, london, sw1h 9hq. printed by st. ives plc, one tudor st, london, ec4y 0ah.for the common good: green party general election manifesto 2015 1for thecommon good general election manifesto 2015 the green party of england and wales 2015 the green party of england and wales 2015this is the manifesto of the green party of england and wales. it covers england and wales, not the whole of the united kingdom.this is the manifesto of the green party of england and wales. it covers england and wales, not the whole of the united kingdom.there are independent sister green parties in scotland and northern ireland.there are independent sister green parties in scotland and northern ireland.their websites are at www.scottishgreens.org.uk and www.greenpartyni.orgtheir websites are at www.scottishgreens.org.uk and www.greenpartyni.orgthe text in this document may be reproduced free of charge in any format or medium provided that it is reproduced accurately andthe text in this document may be reproduced free of charge in any format or medium provided that it is reproduced accuratelynot used in a misleading context.and not used in a misleading context.enquiries relating to the content of and the copyright in this document should be sent to:enquiries relating to the content of and the copyright in this document should be sent to:the press officethe press officethe green party of england and walesthe green party of england and walesdevelopment housedevelopment house5664 leonard street5664 leonard streetec2a 4ltec2a 4lte-mail:press@greenparty.org.uke-mail:press@greenparty.org.ukweb:www.greenparty.org.ukweb:www.greenparty.org.ukcopy editor:liz paton, liz.paton@btinternet.comcopy editor:liz paton, liz.paton@btinternet.comdesign:roana mahmud, roana_mahmud@hotmail.comdesign:roana mahmud, roana_mahmud@hotmail.compromoted by:judy maciejowska on behalf of the green party,promoted by:judy maciejowska on behalf of the green party,both at development house, 5664 leonard street, london, ec2a 4ltboth at development house, 5664 leonard street, london, ec2a 4ltfor the common good: green party general election manifesto 2015 2for the common good: green party general election manifesto 2015 5britain has the wealth and resources to do great things. we can build an economy that gives everyone their fair share of the worlds sixth-richest economy. we can create a humane, caring society that supports everyones needs. and we can be a world leader in tackling the threat of climate change.sadly, our current politics  dominated by a small social group and the power of vested interests - are failing to realisethis potential.our manifesto is a bold plan to create a more equal, more democratic society while doing our part to heal the planet, which has been severely damaged by the effects of an unstable, unsustainable economy.the austerity experiment has failed, as it did in the 1930s. most people have seen their living standards fall, while the top one percent have increased their wealth. millions of households are living in poverty, in fear of want.our nhs is being handed over to the private sector, resulting in a more expensive and inferior service, while highly skilled staff are underpaid and treated without proper respect.6governments of all colours  except green  are failing to get to grips with climate change  the greatest challenge ofour time.yet none of this is inevitable  there is a real alternative.we do not apologise for being bold, ambitious or having a long- term vision for our country. we certainly cannot continue as a nation on our current path.we believe in restoring and extending our public services to create good jobs and meet the needs of a diverse population.we believe in tackling climate change  taking serious action to limit our emissions at home and fighting for a fair global deal that secures humanitys shared future.we believe that we can build a society that works for the common good  and that those with the broadest shoulders really should pay their fair share towards it.together, we can do this. we must do this.natalie bennett, green party leaderfor the common good: green party general election manifesto 2015forewordwe face three connected crises:1. healing the planet from the effects of an unstable, unsustainable economy.2. creating a more equal society, reversing the trend towards a society divided between poverty and great wealth.3. creating truly democratic central and local government that governs for the common good.to help heal the planet we will: make achieving international agreement and action to limit climate change to below 2 degrees c of warming the major foreign policy priority. invest in an 85 billion public programme of renewable electricity generation, flood defences and building insulation. support local sustainable agriculture, with respect for animals and wild places. cut emissions by providing cheaper public transport and encouraging cycling and walking.to become more equal and support our public services we will: end privatisation in the national health service, provide proper funding and free social care for the elderly, and combat the loneliness of the elderly. let teachers teach in properly funded democratically controlled schools, end sats (standard assessment tests), league tables and academies, and introduce free early education and childcare. end tuition fees and cancel student debt. provide 500,000 social homes for rent over the five-year parliament, control excessive rents and achieve house price stability. increase public spending to almost half of national income. make tax fair and crack down vigorously on tax avoidance and evasion. make the minimum wage a living wage for all, with a target of 10 per hour by 2020. make the highest wage in any organisation no more than ten times the lowest wage. create jobs and help small business by reducing employers national insurance. bring rail back into public ownership. ensure respect for everyone whatever their ethnicity, gender, age, religious belief or non-belief, sexual orientation, class, size, disability or other status. create over 1 million jobs through our programme of green investment and restoring the public sector.to create a truly democratic central and local government and a common citizenship and to promote peace based ondemocratic principles we will: reform the benefits system. end workfare and sanctions. double child benefit and pay a pension that people can live on. in the longer term, unite tax and benefits in a basic income system covering everyone. fund local government adequately and set democratically elected local authorities free to decide how to run education, public transport and other local services and to raise local taxes. bring in a fair voting system involving proportional representation. respect immigrants for the contribution they make and control immigration fairly. decommission the trident nuclear deterrent system and promote peacemaking.for the common good: green party general election manifesto 2015 7our policy on a pagefor the common goodimagine a world of efficient and welcoming public services, coordinated action on climate change, equality, workers rights, an economy that works for people and planet at a human scale, restorative justice, and real care for the future, including young people now.imagine a world in which we protect the planet, its land and its oceans, and the plants, animals and people that live on it.imagine a world of security for all, of social security as opportunity not dependency, of lives lived more locally, with services close to where people need them and connected by affordable, energy-efficient public transport.imagine a government that believes in society, in our common humanity, in a culture of hope, and in our capacity to govern ourselves. imagine a government that believes in the common good, and that the best way of achieving it is by working for each other, rather than against each other. imagine honest government.thats the world the green party wants to make real. its also the world that most of us want. when asked to vote for policies rather than parties or personalities, green policies consistently come out on top.and its so different from what we have now. in consumer societies like ours, the common good has been forgotten. somuch government has been outsourced, put out to tender. the reins have been handed over to the unfettered market and big corporations. they are given as the reason why we cant do things (such as bring the railways back into public ownership), why we must do things (lower taxes for the rich) and how we must do things (privatise public utilities). when government has been active its been to make the rich richer and the poor poorer, while blocking action to prevent ecological catastrophe. this has had disastrous consequences for the common good and for the protection of the natural world.back in the 1970s a determined assault on public life began, and the market became the model and measure of life. since then, successive governments of all colours have found ways to justify and deepen the role of the market in our lives. local government? check out your nearest website or leaflet: youre likely to be referred to as a customer, not a citizen. privatisation? look at one of the most recent  royal mail. this was owned by you and me, then it was sold for a song, with windfall profits for companies doing the only job the market really understands  maximising shareholder profit. the public lost 1 billion, while george osbornes best mans hedge fund pocketed 36 million. outsourcing? this is what governments do when theyve given up governing. the result is a series of scandals from companies with increasingly infamous names  g4s, serco, atos  over which we have no control. zero-hours contracts? these are designed for companies looking to maximise profits through labour flexibility, but hopeless if you have regular bills to pay.8for the common good: green party general election manifesto 2015chapter 1the green party:governing for the common goodthe market has been in charge for so long that it dominates our imagination and colours our view of ourselves. the market is short sighted and short term. its time for change  time to put the market to work for the common good and for people to be put back in charge.the green party knows that: its hard to be a citizen when life tells you that you are a consumer; its hard to think of others when we are pitted against one another and sold the lie that individuals are to blame for their misfortunes; and its hard to think of the common good when its never mentioned.private interests have ruled the roost for far too long. the result is a society scarred by inequalities of power and wealth, and a planet plundered of resources and damaged by pollution. all in it together? we dont think so. those with power and wealth have done very well out of austerity: the uks wealthiest 1% grab more than anywhere else in europe.politics has fragmented, public institutions have weakened, peoples lives are dominated by insecurity, and prejudice is rife. we live in a price-tag society  and if you cant pay the price, too bad.things that used to be done by public agencies have been outsourced. once it was a duty for all of us to look after the vulnerable when times were hard. we paid taxes into a common fund to look after the poor, the weak, the old and the sick, and to educate the young. this is what we did as citizens, bound together by what we share rather than separated by what divides us.now care has been outsourced to charity, to food banks. some think this is a sign of the big society, but we think its the sign of a failed society. individual charity is no substitute for collective justice.for 40 years the rich and powerful have forced us to live in their fantasy world  a world that suits the minority not the majority. this is a world imagined from the point of view of the healthy, the wealthy and the privileged. where there is a satisfying job just round the corner if only we could be bothered to look for it, where resources are limitless, and where the only obstacle to total fulfilment is the psychology of individual failure.meanwhile, in the real world where most of us live, we are young and old, sometimes poor and sick, jobs are scarce, the earth groans under the weight of our demands, and the obstacles in the way of our flourishing can be stubborn and unyielding.how should we organise life in this real world?do we want our security to depend on the underpaid zero-hours worker of an outsourced company, maximising shareholder profit? no, we want well-trained, committed workers, properly paid and secure in their own lives  because our well-being is linked to everyone elses.do we want a world in which privatisation is the solution for everything? or have we learnt from energy, water and rail that down that road lies private gain rather than the common good? its public ownership and democratic control that lead to fairer services and better outcomes.the market makes us impatient with the suffering of others, tolerant of inequality, prone to prejudice, suspicious of difference. we know we can be cooperative, appreciative, understanding and fair. we just need a world that encourages us to be these things. together we can create that world.the challenges that lie ahead of us are unique in their combination: declining resources, global warming, deepening inequality, footloose capital. but these problems have been created by us, so they can be solved by us.we need to remake society. and in this remaking we need finally to realise that consumer capitalism is the problem, not the solution. the solution lies in a democratically managed economy that operates within the earths resource limits.we dont want a privatised outsourced state, we want a green and democratic one. we want a public national health service, not privatised healthcare. the uncoordinated actions of millions of individuals, with unequal access to wealth and power and urged to maximise their own interests without regard for anyone elses, will only deepen the crisis. this is whats on offer from the conservatives and the liberal democrats, from labour and from ukip.we need a party prepared to challenge the damage this has done, a party that expects something better. we need a party prepared for the real world.we need a party for the common good.we need the green party.for the common good: green party general election manifesto 2015 9imagine having a secure, fulfilling and decently paid job, knowing that you are working to live and not living to work. imagine coming home to an affordable flat or house, and being valued for your contribution and character, not for how much you earn. imagine knowing that you and your friends are part of an economy that works with the planet rather than against it. imagine food banks going out of business. imagine the end of poverty and deprivation. the key to all this is to put the economy at the service of people and planet rather than the other way round. thats what the green party will do.what is the economy for?the main issue for many at this election is the economy. many people have very practical worries: is my job secure? will our family have enough this month to pay the bills and put food on the table? can we keep paying the mortgage or the rent? will we have to continue to work unreasonably long or unpredictable hours? is my pay fair compared with others? will my benefits be cut? will i ever get a pension? will i ever get a job with a future? will i ever pay off my student loan? will i ever find a decent place to live? will the economy provide a decent livelihood long into the future for our children and grandchildren?our solutions to these worries are very different from the other parties. the coalition parties and labour agree on one thing about the economy: its got to grow because growth is the answer to everything. if the costs include ruining our climate and countryside by exploiting shale gas, tolerating massive inequality and the insecurity of zero-hours contracts or massive underemployment  then too bad.we dont agree with the growth objective. our economic policy promotes a fair, just and more equal society while recognising that we live on a finite planet.its easy to forget the fact that everything we make and everything we buy comes from the earth. and we have only one of them.10 for the common good: green party general election manifesto 2015chapter 2a decent livelihood: a one-planet economyif everyone on earth consumed at the rate we do in the uk, wed need nearly three planets to sustain us. if its the average north american, then wed need nearly four planets. greens are sometimes accused of being unrealistic about economics. nothing could be further from the truth. its our opponents who are the fantasists, believing that continual growth is possible on a finite planet. greens are the realists, understanding that the planet imposes limits and focusing on essentials such as jobs, housing and the household budget. the economy depends on society, which depends on the earth and its resources. thats the order of things  not the other way round.and whats growth for, anyway? the aim of politics is to help us flourish, and by this measure growth has failed in recent decades. the office for national statistics (ons) tells us that gross domestic product (gdp) per person has grown by more than three times since 1955, allowing for inflation. are we three or four times more content? no, levels of life satisfaction have dropped in this period.were told that growth has returned to the uk. the result? more than one in four children is growing up in poverty. the bosses of the uks 100 biggest companies earn on average 143 times more than their staff. the top 1% of the population has the same wealth as the bottom 55%. five families in the uk have the same wealth as 12 million uk citizens. 913,138 people received three days emergency food from trussell trust food banks in 201314 compared with 346,992 in 201213. debt levels are growing. by 2018, 2 million households are expected to spend more than half their disposable income repaying loans. household incomes adjusted for inflation are still on average 2% below what they were in 200910.so its not the economy, stupid. or at least not one that grows forever. the green party believes that equality is much more important than growth. and growth doesnt bring equality; in fact it helps to justify inequality.the result of the corrosive trickle-down fantasy is plain: the sixth-richest society in the world is disfigured by high levels of deprivation. and its not only those right at the bottom who have problems. despite the fact that household incomes are now back to 200708 levels, families on ordinary incomes have faced a real squeeze since 200910 as prices go up and incomes stagnate.we will abandon gdp and the pursuit of growth as a measure of economic success. we would use a measure of adjusted national product (anp), which would take account of capital and environmental depreciation and include the value of many things not currently paid for, such as unpaid work at home.short-term economic stimuluswe make an important distinction between short-term growth, or regeneration, and long-term dependency on continuing economic growth.the measures we propose as alternatives to austerity will, by halting and reversing the cuts to public services, restore lost jobs and create new ones. the increased economic activity will cause the economy to grow rather than shrink in the short term, restoring employment and living standards.however, we see such short-term growth as transitional, as a side-effect of ending the failed austerity project. we do not see it as a contradiction to adapting the economy for one-planet living in the longer term.joining up the policies. government is run too much by departments, which rarely take any notice of each other. greens like to join things up...so what do social justice and greater equality have to do with health, education, opportunity, the numbers in prison, and even recycling? this manifesto has many other policies designed to improve all these things. but just making us more equal will improve all of them.green councillors mobilise alternatives to payday lenders...in a move to break peoples dependence on payday lenders, in stowmarket, suffolk, councillor john matthissen is leading a cross-agency project to launch a collection and information point for the local credit union.for the common good: green party general election manifesto 2015 11alternatives to austeritythere is an alternative to austerity. the crunch of 2008 was the result of the pressures of our consumer society and an unregulated finance system; people borrowed too much and banks were too willing to lend. now people and businesses are paying down their debts, businesses contract haphazardly and workers are laid off.the coalitions reaction was to use this as an excuse to impose austerity  in order to cut the debt, especially the governments deficit  while doing little to strengthen the economy. the winners are those who absorb corporate surpluses, the chief executives and the shareholders. the biggest losers are the unemployed, the low paid and the vulnerable, especially those who depend on public services. labour plans to match the tories fiscal envelope for departmental spending  code for more austerity.we think the economy should work for us all. we want a one-planet economy that will address the challenge of climate change and unacceptable levels of inequality. we have to throw off the shackles of market ideology and consider afresh what really needs to be done. we need to: ensure that everyone who wants one has a decent secure job paid at least a living wage. so we have to encourage and create jobs. in total, the policies in this manifesto will create over 1 million jobs. see the section on work in chapter 9. address the issue of climate change. we need huge investment in using energy more efficiently and generating energy sustainably. this will not happen without public investment. see chapter 4 on energy and climate. stabilise and tightly regulate the financial sector, whose greed and recklessness have been a major cause of our recent economic difficulties and of growing inequality. see the section on finance in chapter 9. provide equality and security in a mixed economy by committing to the common good, a larger public sector and higher taxation, funding our health, education and local services properly, and creating hundreds of thousands of jobs. see the section on taxes in chapter 9. be prepared to borrow on good terms to fund investment rather than making closing the deficit the main objective of our economic policy. the plans in this manifesto require borrowing of 338 billion (in real 2015 terms) over the parliament as compared with the coalitions plan in the 2015 budget to borrow 115 billion. if monetary policy demands quantitative easing, we will spend that money directly on green investment. however, the programme of public spending and taxation in this manifesto would show a surplus on the current account (that is, excluding investment) of 2.7% by the endof the parliament. reject the dogma that everything is best done by the private sector. a sensible economy is a mixed economy, where some things  health, education and public transport, for example  are better in community or public ownership. see chapters 6, 7 and 12 on health, education and transport. support those without jobs and treat them with respect in a system that makes getting some work worthwhile and provides pensions that allow older people to live with dignity. see chapter 10 on social security. mobilise the talents and energy of everyone and serve everyone, including the young and the old, men and women, those who are disabled and minority groups, including ethnic minorities and different sexual orientations. see chapter 5on equalities. recognise that not everything that is valuable has a price attached to it. create a robust taxation system that promotes equality and sustainability. rein in huge companies that put shareholder returns ahead of the common good. foster institutional change in the economy that we want, with changes to company law and encouragement for small firms and mutuals. see the changing economic organisations and small firms sections in chapter 9. create an efficient economy that encourages innovation and the use of science but does not rely on dangerous technologies. see the science section in chapter 3. foster an economy that is open to europe and the wider world, that accepts people will move from country to country, and that is willing to assist countries poorer than ours. see chapter 13 on international affairs. ensure that the treasurys priority objective is to deliver an economy with these aims. how we will do this is set out in detail in the following chapters.12 for the common good: green party general election manifesto 2015the third planet from the sun. our home. home to 9 million other species. the only planet with liquid water at its surface. the only planet in the solar system with 21% oxygen. as far as we know, the only planet in the solar system that sustains life. imagine a political party that prioritises the protection of the land, the seas and their inhabitants. imagine one that believes that animals have a right to flourish and arent just a means to the end of human satisfaction. imagine one that believes the common good embraces other species and not just our own. thats what a real political party, the green party, does.the earth is our home, and this is what we are doing to it: we have lost half the wild animals on earth in the past 40 years. we lose between 200 and 100,000 species every year. this is between 1,000 and 10,000 times faster than the natural extinction rate. we are causing a sixth extinction. the other five occurred naturally; this one is down to us. we have increased co2 concentrations from a pre-industrial 280 parts per million (ppm) to about 400 ppm. global temperatures are due to rise between 1.5 and 4.8 degrees c by 2100. and thats just the internationally agreed range without feedback effects. many experts are predicting rises as high as 6 degrees c.for the first time in the history of the earth one species is changing it forever  the human species. they call this new era the anthropocene. we now have our very own geological epoch.this brings with it massive responsibilities, which no other party understands or acknowledges. the rich and powerful, in particular, have spent too long treating the earth like an indestructible storehouse, to be thoughtlessly pillaged of its natural resources. uk biodiversity is threatened by development and agricultural practices such as intensive farming, the draining of wetlands and the deforesting of hills. genetic selection is causing endemic health and welfare problems in domestic and farmed animals. animal experimentation is still routine; millions of animals suffer pain and death every year in the uk. overfishing is devastating marine ecosystems. our attitude to the natural world is epitomised by the fact that some circuses still tour with wild animals, including zebras, lions, snakes, tigers and camels.the green party will put policies in place that will stop us treating other species and the wider environment as a means to the satisfaction of humans only. this is because the common good includes other species too. we depend on them for our own welfare. every second breath we take is made possible by phytoplankton releasing oxygen into the oceans. as the oceans acidify and heat up through global warming, their capacity to fix co2 and release oxygen is compromised. this is interdependence at work, and we ride roughshod over it at our peril. but we should also care for other species because the planet is their home too; we share it with them and we need to take their interests and well-being  as well as ours  into account.for the common good: green party general election manifesto 2015 13chapter 3 the earthwildlife and open spaceswe need to halt the damage to nature in the uk and return protection of our natural landscapes to a central part in our national life. the time has come for a new legal framework for the protection of landscape and wildlife, and we would promote a new nature and well-being act.on landscape and habitats we will: protect, expand, properly fund and improve non-car access to our national parks. make good the coalitions unfulfilled promise to protect forests through a forests protection bill. reduce dramatically the use of pesticides and prioritise non-chemical farming methods through improved agri-environment schemes, legislation, education and the promotion of good practice in all farming, as well as increased support fororganic farming. secure protection of rural residents and communities from exposure to pesticides sprayed on nearby crop fields and prohibit the use of pesticides in the locality of homes, schools and childrens playgrounds. improve the management of woodlands through new planting and the local use of sustainable woodland products. aim to ensure through planning that everyone lives within five minutes walk of a green open space, and ensure local authorities have the resources to extend and maintain local parks. introduce a nature improvement area in every town, city and county. help bees by reducing pesticide use (banning neonicotinoids), greening farming, improving planning guidelines to preserve/ create bee habitats and making bees a priority species in biodiversity strategies. promote landscape-scale conservation, using reform of the common agricultural policy, improved agri-environment schemes and the planning system. in particular, all farm payments should be designed to protect the soil, reduce flood risk, conserve wildlife, improve water quality, increase recreation and assist carbon capture. we would also include protecting ecosystems in our aid for developing countries. repeal the national planning policy framework and in particular its presumption in favour of development, and put planning back in the hands of local people and government, while requiring local authorities to map local ecological networks and work collaboratively to develop national spatial plans. increase the amount of land offered long-term protection through the european unions birds directive and habitats directive, make sure these directives are properly enforced and defend them in the eu against attempts to weaken them. work with local communities, scientists and conservation groups to expand the uks network of marine conservation zones to create areas specifically for the protection of mobile species as well as reference areas off limits to fishing and other extractive activities. play our part in creating a southern atlantic reserve and champion internationally the protection of the arctic. produce a strategy for capturing carbon and reducing greenhouse gases through improved land management, for example byencouraging and preserving peatlands. because of the interaction between water supply and the wider environment, require ofwat (the water services regulation authority) and the environment agency to work together to create a healthy water environment and long-term low prices for consumers. in particular, build new reservoirs in the south and east of england. prohibit developers from being allowed to destroy unique habitats by way of biodiversity offsetting elsewhere. because 94% of the biodiversity for which the uk is responsible is found in our overseas territories, ensure that conservation of the environment of the overseas territories, including their marine areas, is funded to a level equal to their global significance. we would also immediately extend ratification of the un convention on biological diversity to all uninhabited territories, and work with territory governments to agree a timeline for ratification of the convention in allinhabited territories.greens in power carry out our policiesthe green-led administration in brighton has secured open access to more green space in perpetuity. it declared over 800 acres of council-owned downland and farmland as open access land, meaning residents can freely use land that was once closed to them. it added another 670 acres in july 2014, protected in perpetuity.14for the common good: green party general election manifesto 2015food, farming and fisheriesmarket forces and government policies have favoured increasing industrialisation of agriculture, mass-produced food and dependence on fossil fuels. this comes with great external costs to the environment, human health, farming people and animal welfare. soil erosion, depletion of water resources, pollution, loss of biodiversity and animal suffering are commonplace. in addition, agriculture accounts for a significant proportion of greenhouse gas emissions, and pressure on land resources is linked with deforestation in many parts of the world.but food supply and farming are not just another business, and we need to ensure: that nutritious food is available to everyone at prices they can afford; decent rural livelihoods and support for rural communities; that there is national and international food security; that farming respects the environment and treats farm animals well.to secure these objectives we will: seek to reform the common agricultural policy and reform our national agri-environment schemes to prioritise and support farmers who farm sustainably and enhance biodiversity on farmed land with a variety of farming styles, methods and scales. foster environmentally sustainable agriculture, land management and a secure food supply by properly supporting valid, rigorous and reliable research into all areas and types of farming including organic farming. encourage farming to operate in fair trade conditions, which guarantee a decent livelihood for farmers at home and also in countries that export food to the uk. protect productive farmland from development except for that associated with agriculture and those engaged in it. in particular, review the current classification of farm land to maximise local production of food. work to reduce food imports and increase home and local food production where feasible. increase localisation of the food chain and encourage direct sales via local markets; support fair trade for farmers and enable them to gain independence from disadvantageous contracts with supermarkets by strengthening the powers of the supermarket ombudsman. help hospitals and schools and other food buyers in the public sector to lead the way in buying sustainable products, and encourage children to be involved in growing and cooking food. work to ensure sustainable fishing policies, leading to sustainable fishing communities, at both the national and european levels as appropriate. in particular, fishing quota allocations should reward local sustainable fisheries. research, promote and support farming methods that reduce greenhouse gas emissions, enable carbon storage and have minimum impact on wildlife, as established by rigorous and reliable research. in particular, we should encourage eating less and better meat. support a moratorium, at national and eu level, on the use of genetically modified organisms (gmos) in all agricultural systems, including production of human food and animal feed, and on importation of gm food or feed. work to reduce food waste.animal protectionwe support calls for a new commission on animal protection, which would cover animal protection issues in all the areas specifically addressed below.green councillors promote local food...councillor molly scott cato in stroud secured 100,000 in the district council budget to invest in local food production for everyone. in a rural area like stroud, it makes sense to support local food producers so that everyone can eat food grown within the district, she said. molly was elected in 2014 as the new green member of the european parliament (mep) for the south west.for the common good: green party general election manifesto 2015 15in farming, we must move away from the intensification and industrialisation of animal farming. sustainable farming means animals freed from cages and returned to the land. we will end factory farming and enforce strict animal welfare standards. in particular we will work for:a complete ban on cages for hens and rabbits and on zero-grazing units for dairy cows. improved food labelling and better traceability of our food to prevent further food scandals such as the horse meat scandal;mandatory labelling of meat and dairy products as to method of production and method of slaughter. mandatory cctv in all slaughterhouses. tougher regulations on animal transportation, including a maximum limit of 8 hours and an end to live export from the uk. action to stop the overuse of antibiotics in intensive animal farming, with mandatory targets and surveillance of the human health impacts. a ban on the production and sale of foie gras. a ban on the cloning of farm animals and on the sale of meat and milk from these animals. ending genetic selection for fast growth or high yields where this results in compromised welfare such as ill health or pain. protection for british farmers from low-welfare imports.illegal wildlife trade is causing great suffering; it devastates species across the globe and is linked to other serious organised crimes. greens will implement: increased support and resources to build expertise in wildlife crime within the justice sector, including: strengthening sentencing in this area, gathering data on the trade, ensuring police forces implement local strategies and ensuring funding of the wildlife crime unit. a ban on the import of exotic pets. an end to the keeping of primates as household pets. enhanced public education and awareness to reduce demand. allocation of resources to support other countries in tackling poaching and human/wildlife conflict.on other animal protection issues we would: maintain and strengthen the ban on hunting with dogs and extend this ban to all hunting of all animals for sport or pleasure. end the badger cull (see badger culls box). end the use of snares. end the practice of grouse shooting and other sport shooting. end the use of all animals in circuses. end the use of the whip in horse racing and conduct a full review of the sport. take action over other sports or entertainment that cause suffering to animals. ensure uk taxpayers money is not used to fund bullfighting. ensure greater protection for racing greyhounds and initiate a formal independent review of the industry. ban the import of fur products. work for stronger international protection of endangered sea creatures, and an end to the killing of porpoises, whales and dolphins in all waters and keeping these animals for commercial purposes.joining up the policiesso what do farming, health, insurance and carbon dioxide emissions have to do with each other? good farming respects ecology, promotes biodiversity and encourages us to get out and enjoy the wildlife and landscape, improving both our mental and our physical health. and local food saves food miles, combating climate change, while good land management can retain water, reducing flooding and our insurance premiums.16for the common good: green party general election manifesto 2015badger culls  inhumane and unscientificthe green party has been strongly opposed to the badger cull from the outset, saying that all the evidence showed it would be both inhumane and ineffective at tackling bovine tuberculosis. the department for environment, food and rural affairs (defra) controversially went ahead with culling by free shooting in gloucestershire and somerset in 2013. the trial was a failure, being shown to be both inhumane and ineffective, as predicted. the coalition has nonetheless chosen to continue to pursuethis strategy.in october 2012 green mp caroline lucas secured a major parliamentary debate to challenge the governments badger policy and led mps in a successful vote against it.greens want to see an end to all animal experimentation and will ensure that research funding is directed away from failing animal disease models and towards modern human biology-based techniques, which offering greater opportunities to cure disease and improve product safety.we will work to end animal experiments but believe immediate action must be taken to: stop non-medical experiments, experiments using primates, cats and dogs. end the use of live animals in military training. stop the breeding of and use of genetically altered animals. end government funding of animal experimentation, including any that is outsourced to other countries. provide greater funding for non-animal research methods and link funding to a target for developing of humane alternatives to animal experiments. increase transparency and ensure publication of all findings of animal research, including negative findings. introduce a comprehensive system for reviewing animal experiments and initiate a comparison of currently required animaltests with a set of human biology-based tests. on companion animals greens will push to: completely review and update existing dog legislation, particularly relating to dog control. ensure properly coordinated action on dog fighting. update the rules on selling animals and tackle problems associated with online advertising of pets and illegal imports. introduce mandatory licensing of breeders and control on genetic manipulation through breeding to prevent exaggerated characteristics likely to cause suffering. end puppy farming by banning the sale of young puppies unless the mother is present. introduce regulations that make it illegal to use aversive training aids such as electric shock collars.greens in power carry out our policiesin brighton, the green-led council ensures that new council tenancy agreements include a requirement that dogs living in council- owned homes should be micro-chipped. this has encouraged more tenants who own dogs to behave responsibly as their pets are much easier to trace.for the common good: green party general election manifesto 2015 17science and technologygreens are pro-science. our policies on everything from climate change to eradicating bovine tb are based on the best possible scientific evidence. but just because science allows us to do something, that does not mean that we should do it. we oppose nuclear power and the release of genetically modified crops into the environment. we need to balance our scientific and technological abilities against the social, economic and ethical consequences of using them  including their impact on future generations and other species.greens will support the development of technologies that have strong social, economic and environmental benefits. that is why we support investment in energy efficiency and the development of renewable energy, which will be vital in helping to secure improvements in peoples quality of life and to combating climate change.we would: ensure that adequate government funding goes to research on major environmental issues such as climate change, pollution and biodiversity loss, and less is spent on military research. ensure that basic research is adequately funded and is not controlled by large corporations, and gradually increase public spending on scientific research from 0.5% to 1.0% of gdp over the next ten years. ensure that scientific research is conducted ethically, with regard in particular to human and animal welfare. publish freely the results of all publicly funded research. prevent the patenting of genes and living organisms.what scientists sayso... the green party... a party of sentimental tree-huggers? yes, we do love trees, and many of us take great moral and spiritual solace from the natural world. but we are also a party of science, and we listen to scientists. here is what the royal society, the uks pre-eminent scientific body, said in its 2012 people and the planet report (pp. 78):first, the worlds 1.3 billion poorest people need to be raised out of extreme poverty. this is critical to reducing global inequality, and to ensuring the wellbeing of all people...second, in the most developed and the emerging economies unsustainable consumption must be urgently reduced. this will entail scaling back or radical transformation of damaging material consumption and emissions and the adoption of sustainable technologies, and is critical to ensuring a sustainable future for all...third, global population growth needs to be slowed and stabilised, but this should by no means be coercive.we agree. in the general election you can vote for the only real party of science or for the parties of neo-liberal economic ideology, which believe in the illusion that we can continue to expand forever on a finite planet.waste and recyclingreducing the amount of waste we produce and being more careful about how we dispose of it has benefits for our planet, our economy and society as a whole. we want to move towards a jobs-rich circular economy with as much waste minimisation as possible.we would: reduce what we use, reuse it when we have finished with it and recycle as a last resort. provide the framework and the infrastructure to help people make more positive choices. use taxation and regulation to ensure that products and packaging are designed with a view to what happens to them when they stop being useful and packaging reduced. we want waste designed out and fixing things  making them last  designed in. follow scotland in banning waste food and other organic material being sent to landfill. increase national spending on recycling and waste disposal by about 50%, an extra 4 billion a year, so that we can do awaywith damaging incineration and landfill. aim to recycle 70% of domestic waste by 2020 as a move towards a zero-waste system.18 for the common good: green party general election manifesto 2015imagine flicking a switch and knowing that the energy was coming from the sun, the wind, the earth and the tides; energy forever, not just for now. imagine not having to decide between heating or eating; no fuel poverty. imagine glancing out of the window and seeing a van arrive to insulate your neighbours house as part of a funded nationwide programme  reducing demand as well as creating supply. imagine your energy bill coming from a community-owned company or cooperative rather than from one of the big six. imagine being part of the company or cooperative yourself; energy security for us all rather than profits for the few. this is all possible; this is green party energy policy. energy for all without climate change.we all use energy. it keeps our houses warm, powers much of our transport and home appliances, and cooks our food. our lives depend on it and it takes up a large part of our spending, especially if we are poor. too many people suffer fuel poverty.we get a bad deal on energy. when wholesale prices go up, the prices for domestic electricity and for fuel at the pumps go up rapidly. when wholesale prices go down, the retail prices seem to stick. the big energy companies make huge profits but do not serve the common good. we need to put this right and ensure that: everyone is able to cook and keep warm; we are charged for what we use, and not penalised for using less; we are not cut off or forced to use pre-payment meters.but burning fossil fuels for energy causes climate change. if we are to secure a safe and habitable climate for current and future generations, we need a rapid shift to a zero-carbon energy system; we need to leave the vast majority of fossil fuel reserves underground and unburned. other ways of getting energy, such as nuclear power, pose other unacceptable risks. so we have to build a secure and affordable energy system that meets our basic needs while protecting our environment.we believe this requires an energy policy that: reduces the amount of energy we need, mainly by improving energy efficiency. ends fuel poverty. invests massively in renewable generation. reorganises the energy generation and supply industry, in particular breaking the dominance of the big six suppliers. puts community, cooperative and locally owned clean energy generation and supply at the heart of our energy system.we have to start with climate change, because this drives the degree of urgency with which we change our energy system.for the common good: green party general election manifesto 2015 19chapter 4energy and the climateclimate changethe climate is the ultimate common good. the effects of a rapidly warming climate will affect everyone, but poorer people, in the uk and worldwide, will be the hardest hit. many are already struggling to cope with rising sea levels, flooding, drought and extreme weather. climate change threatens to make parts of the world uninhabitable. climate refugee numbers will increase. more intense weather events will further affect health and food production and make global conflict more likely.the science makes it clear that, to avoid the risk of runaway climate change, we must leave around four-fifths of all existing fossil fuel reserves in the ground. so the problem now is not too little fossil fuel but too much. exploiting new sources of unconventional fossil fuels such as shale gas and oil and tar sands is incompatible with tackling climate change. we must reduce our dependency on oil, coal and gas as quickly as possible while developing a society that can thrive on renewable energy.and theres not much time. to have a reasonable chance of avoiding catastrophic climate change, we need a 90% reduction in greenhouse gases in the uk in the next 1520 years and a zero-carbon economy by 2050 (see the box for how we derive these targets). this is much more challenging than the 80% reduction in greenhouse gases by 2050 in the climate change act 2008. although we celebrate, defend and uphold the climate change act, it must also be strengthened.a green transformation would have huge benefits: more comfortable homes, better health, less pollution, lots of jobs, and far less dependency on foreign fuel imports.the uk can and must do better: the governments climate change advisers say we are on track to miss even the governments unsatisfactory carbon targets. progress on energy efficiency has plummeted. the governments green deal to save energy in our homes has been a disappointing failure. the uk is 25th out of 27 in the european renewable energy league table, despite having some of the best resources for renewable energy in europe. we have the highest level of fuel poverty in western europe.why we need to do better than the climate change actif the global average temperature rise can be kept below 2 degrees c, runaway or disastrous climate change can be avoided, though severe damage will occur in some parts of the world. many countries and civil society organisations argue that the international goal should be to keep to 1.5 degrees c of warming, highlighting the severity of the climate impacts we are already seeing. all countries including the uk agreed at copenhagen in 2009 to recognise the need to limit the average temperature rise to below 2 degrees c, despite the fact that the uks climate change target means that there is an almost two-thirds (63%) chance of exceeding this 2 degrees c.to meet the 2 degree c target, the world needs to limit total global emissions over the rest of the century to about 1,000 gigatonnes (gt) co2. current projections have us exceeding that figure by 2040, leading to devastating average warming of around 4 degrees c by the end of this century.as the uk has about 1% of the worlds population, its allowable budget would amount to 10 gt co2. but the uk is a relativelyrich country that has benefited from the worlds highest cumulative historical emissions per person. the green party therefore believes that the uk should plan to emit only half this amount by 2030 (which amounts to around 80 million tonnes co2 a year by 2030), and have negligible emissions thereafter. this translates into our target of reducing greenhouse gas emissions to 10% of their 1990 levels by 2030. this goes much further than the 80% reduction in greenhouse gases by 2050 mandated by the climate change act.20for the common good: green party general election manifesto 2015using energy wiselyrenewables can supply all the energy we need for a comfortable standard of living, but only if we invest wisely and manage our demand more sensibly  by reducing energy waste and improving efficiency. the green party would seek to cut energy demand by one-third by 2020, one-half by 2030 and two-thirds by 2050.the uk already has the technology it needs. what is lacking is the political will to build a cleaner, home-grown, more local, more affordable, more democratic and ultimately more reliable energy future.caroline lucas and fuel povertywhen joint chair of parliaments cross-party group on ending fuel poverty and promoting energy efficiency, green mp caroline lucas was a leading advocate of urgent action to end the scandal of cold homes. she initiated a debate in parliaments westminster hall about curbing the power of the big six energy companies and has asked parliamentary questions, lobbied ministers, spoken in debates and tabled amendments to legislation demanding action on warm homes and lower bills.caroline has campaigned for home energy efficiency to be made a uk national infrastructure priority and to be given the necessary funding. she has stood up in parliament for an energy bill revolution  the creation of the worlds most ambitious home energy-efficiency programme, which would slash energy bills and carbon emissions, create over 100,000 jobs and help end the fuel poverty crisis once and for all.home energy improvement will be central to this drive to accelerate energy saving while ensuring energy is affordable to all. we will: provide a free nationwide retrofit insulation programme, concentrating on areas where fuel poverty is most serious. this is designed to insulate 9 million homes in total and take at least 2 million homes out of fuel poverty, aiming for the passivhaus ultra low-energy refurbishment standard by 2020. it will offer up to 5,000 worth of free insulation, or other energy improvements such as solar photovoltaics (pv) if the insulation is already up to the standard, to every home in designated areas. to reach passivhaus standards, there will be the option of up to a further 15,000 in subsidised loans from the green investment bank for each dwelling for further improvements. this programme will invest 45 billion over the course of the parliament (including investment in training and awareness), be delivered by local authorities and create well over 100,000 jobs. it will become part of a new green national infrastructure programme. give tenants the right to require landlords to achieve the same improvement to the energy performance of their home, and require all private rented sector housing to meet energy performance band c by 2025. require all new homes to be built to the passivhaus standard. support this investment in insulating and building to passivhaus standards with investment in training for the design and building industries, by creating a national college for training in energy home improvement, and building relationships with a network of affiliated facilities, including existing colleges and private training providers. invest too in energy awareness programmes so that people become as aware of the energy performance of their home (and of other buildings too) as they are now of the miles per gallon of their car. continue a fully funded renewable heat incentive scheme. provide 4.5 billion over the parliament to support research and development into less energy-intensive industrial processes. prioritise public over private transport, electrification of the transport system and access over mobility. give councils the power to insist that communal heating schemes, for example using waste heat from industrial sources, are implemented where practicable. establish mandatory standards for commercial building performance such as iso 5001. use carbon taxes (based on the present system) to fund investment in energy-efficiency measures, and prepare for thefollowing parliament a carbon quota scheme to regulate the level of demand for energy.green councillors make home insulation happen...work began last year in stroud on a five-year 12 million programme planned by green councillors phillip booth and simon pickering to improve the energy efficiency of over 1,000 homes in the district. new local jobs will be created for trades people to install insulation, solar panels and heat pumps.the four greens on kirklees council secured three years of free home insulation funding, against the active opposition of labour councillors, who later tried to claim credit! this saved householders around 76 per year at 2011 prices and cut emissions. it also created 243 jobs in the local economy.for the common good: green party general election manifesto 2015 21carbon quotas  how they would workthe fairest way to share emissions rights is equally. so we support the idea of an economy-wide system of carbon quotas, with everyone guaranteed the same basic entitlement, regardless of wealth. those who use less than this could sell some of their quota to those who use more, rewarding their carbon thrift.about half the available carbon units could be distributed, free of charge, to all adults in the country. the rest of the carbon units could be sold by the government to companies and other organisations. whenever you bought fossil fuels or electricity your carbon account card would be debited.you would be able to sell excess carbon units  or buy extra units if you need to.owning and controlling our energy systemour vision for the energy system is a diverse mix of public and private participants, including community, cooperative and municipal generation, supply and distribution. we will end the dominance of the big six energy companies. we will stabilise the policy landscape for renewable energy to provide certainty for investment decisions, including long-term targets and stable feed- in tariffs.we will: maximise opportunities for community or municipally owned, or cooperative not-for-profit organisations to generate and supply electricity and heat at the retail level. set a target for at least 42 gigawatts (gw) of community power by 2020. require grid operators to give priority access to community energy projects at an affordable cost. split up the large vertically integrated companies so that they cant both produce energy and supply it to consumers. secure public control over the strategic direction and policies of the national grid. support long-term stable fixed-price feed-in tariffs for renewable energy generators. ensure that consumer energy tariffs are progressive, so small consumers pay less per unit than larger ones, that special needs are recognised, that people are not cut off when they cant afford to pay, and that people are not forced to have pre- payment meters. ensure that there is a single scheme of regulation for the entire industry, whose objectives include achieving climate change targets as well as protecting consumer interests.why we say no to frackingfracking is a process where water, sand and chemicals are injected at high pressure into shale rocks under the ground to release shale gas or oil.three years ago we called for a moratorium on fracking-related activity while the environmental and economic impacts of drilling for shale gas were evaluated. on that basis, we are now emphatic and unambiguous in proposing an outright ban on fracking and related extreme energy technologies (coal-bed methane and underground coal gasification, as well as hydraulic fracturing).fracking is incompatible with the uks climate change obligations. there is already around five times more fossil fuel globally than we can safely burn if are to avoid dangerous climate change. encouraging a whole new fossil fuel industry is deeply irresponsible and undermines international efforts to secure a global climate agreement.fracking will put communities and our environment at risk. there are serious and legitimate concerns about the potential for fracking to cause water contamination, air pollution and harm to wildlife and public health. fracking sites would entail mass lorry movements, blighting our countryside and villages.22for the common good: green party general election manifesto 2015speeding the renewables revolutionthe green party strategy for energy efficiency ensures that we can change to an energy system based mainly on electricity from renewables within 1520 years (a little longer for transport). this will require substantial investment over the period. we also need to pay more attention to energy storage. so we will: invest substantial amounts of public money (up to 35 billion over the parliament) in renewable generation and in the national grid, if necessary, to make sure renewable generation grows quickly enough. this would include both large-scale generation and small- and medium-scale renewable generation schemes funded through local authorities. this capacity would not necessarily be publicly owned and would include community-owned schemes. give the green investment bank full borrowing powers to help fund this investment. concentrate on expanding mature renewable technologies such as wind energy and solar pv in the period until 2030 andbringing down costs, in part by reducing planning constraints, including those for onshore wind. ensure that all schools, hospitals and other public buildings have solar panels by 2020. encourage all social landlords to develop plans to install solar panels on all suitable properties, building on kirklees councils pioneering 10 million plan to install solar panels on 2,000 council homes over the next two years. schemes such as these can save people on low incomes the equivalent of up to two weeks rent. set deployment targets to bring down costs and attract investment in manufacturing and supply chains, aiming for 42 gw of offshore wind by 2020 and 60 gw by 2030, and for 25 gw of solar pv by 2020. spend 2.5 billion over the parliament on an intensive research and deployment programme for other renewables such as wave and tidal stream generators or other approaches, and also for storage technologies. phase out fossil-fuel-based generation, including the closure of all coal-fired power stations by 2023 at the very latest. phase out nuclear power within ten years. ban all uk fracking operations  following a growing number of nations worldwide  and withdraw all relevant licences as soon as possible. ban other new fossil fuel developments such as other unconventional fossil fuels and open cast coal. end fossil fuel industry tax breaks, phase out other harmful fossil fuel subsidies (domestic and international) and use the money saved to help fund other parts of our energy programme. work with financial institutions, local councils and others to encourage divestment from fossil fuels and develop alternative investment in efficiency and renewables programmes. support the potential deployment of carbon capture and storage to existing biomass and gas power stations only as a transitional technology. develop biomass generation only where it can be done in a sustainable way giving regard to the environmental and human costs of some large-scale biomass fuel operations. set in law a decarbonisation target for the power sector of 2550 grams of carbon dioxide per kilowatt hour by 2030. expand electricity storage capacity, including using the potential storage capacity of electric vehicles, and develop thecommercial and regulatory framework to make this a reality. introduce smart meters and appliances.for the common good: green party general election manifesto 2015 23adapting to climate changeapart from rebuilding the uks energy system, we also need to adapt to the climate change that will take place as the effects of past emissions work their way through the system. in the uk there will be wetter winters and hotter and drier summers. we can expect greater instability, with more episodes of extreme weather, such as the heavy rain and floods of the 201314 winter. we need to begin urgently to prepare for this by: providing help for people and communities to prepare for an increasingly variable climate. we would give an extra 1 billion a year to local authorities and the environment agency to spend on assisting communities with flood protection and on defending homes and public buildings, such as hospitals, from heat waves. obliging government departments and local authorities to consider climate change and carbon reduction in all their planning over a long time horizon of 50100 years. specifically, local authorities should do so in all planning decisions. having the government act as an insurer of last resort where commercial insurance companies are refusing to provide flood cover. preventing new building on flood plains. encouraging storing water in uplands through full river system management  including wetland restoration, natural regeneration, allowing rivers to meander and allowing flooding upstream. water management needs to become part of the rules for farming subsidies.green councillor sets the pace on flooding...thanks to a lone green councillor, who at the time held the balance of power, islington became the first uk council to set a minimum amount of permeable land to prevent flooding.nuclear energy  its still no thanksin recent years, the nuclear industry has tried to re-brand itself as green. as the uks only environmental party, the green party needs to set out why it still considers that nuclear is no answer to either climate change or our energy needs.nuclear energy is not green. nuclear energy is neither zero carbon nor renewable and there is serious debate about whether itis even low carbon. uncertainties involved in carbon costing, radioactive waste management and the carbon costs of obtaining uranium mean that the carbon costs of nuclear are unknowable. unlike renewables, we simply cannot rely on it being low carbon.in addition to its highly dubious low-carbon credentials, nuclear energy is a seriously flawed policy in other ways: nuclear energy is extremely expensive: not one nuclear plant has ever been built, anywhere in the world by private investorswithout huge public subsidies. the coalition government has agreed to guarantee edf nearly double the current market electricity price at hinkley, in addition to other financial backing not available to other low-carbon generators. these subsidies would impose enormous and unjustifiable costs on householders and businesses. nuclear remains a uniquely dangerous form of energy. if the new plant being built by edf at hinkley were to release an equivalent amount of radiation to fukushima, and the wind was in the south-west, bristol would need to be permanently evacuated. no long-term solution has yet been found to the question of dealing with nuclear waste. wind power has been found to create around 12 times as many jobs as the same investment in nuclear, and solar power isestimated to create around 360 times as many jobs. investing in energy efficiency (e.g. insulation) creates even more jobs. renewables can provide the same base load production as nuclear power at a lower cost without the risks. nuclear power diverts investment, skills and expertise away from securing the economic, employment and energy security benefits of home-grown renewables, smart grids and demand reduction. the current uk nuclear programme is planned around a reactor design, the european pressurized reactor (epr), which has an atrocious construction and cost record. eprs being built in france and finland are years behind schedule and have huge cost overruns. even if nuclear were the answer, the epr would still be the wrong plant to build.24for the common good: green party general election manifesto 2015more equal societies almost always do better than unequal ones  and thats true for the well-off as well as for the poor. almost every modern social and environmental problem  ill health, lack of community life, violence, drugs, obesity, mental illness, long working hours, big prison populations  is more likely to occur in a less equal society. imagine a world in which everyone is respected whatever their ethnicity, gender, age, religious belief or non-belief, sexual orientation, gender identity, class, size, disability or other status. imagine a world in which no one earns more than ten times what anyone else earns. wed all be healthier, happier and more confident. this could be the real world the green party creates.the green party is opposed to inequality not just because it is wrong in itself and because more equal societies are happier societies, but because it fosters inappropriate growth. we are encouraged to measure our prosperity by comparing it with the material conditions of others. celebrity culture and the lifestyles of the rich create a climate of envy and a desire to match them. this fuels consumption that satisfies pointless wants for some rather than vital needs for all.growth justifies inequality. it is claimed that: if the economy gets bigger some benefit will trickle down to the poor and vulnerable; a rising tide floats all boats  forgetting that not everyone has a boat.however, recent research by the organisation for economic co-operation and development (oecd) confirms that this theory is just wrong. in a resource-constrained world, equality makes much more sense than inequality. our taxation, pay and social security plans will make the uk a materially more equal society.equality and diversityequality is a matter not just of material goods but of treating people fairly  celebrating diversity rather than punishing it. the green party aims to treat everyone equally and fairly.we will: reinstate the funding for the equality and human rights commission. make equality and diversity lessons mandatory in all schools, from the first year of primary education onwards, to combat all forms of prejudice and bullying, to promote understanding and acceptance of difference and to ensure community cohesion. continue to tackle institutional racism in the police force and the wider criminal justice system. require all police forces to have equality and diversity liaison officers whose remit is to tackle and take preventive action on crimes originating in discrimination against any group, and to treat crimes arising from such discrimination on a par with racist crimes. implement a uk-wide strategy to tackle violence against women, including domestic violence, rape and sexual abuse, female genital mutilation and trafficking. ensure that effective action is taken to prevent discrimination against people with disabilities.for the common good: green party general election manifesto 2015 25chapter 5 equalities provide comprehensive training for teachers and educational staff on all diversity and inclusion issues. oblige schools to promote equal opportunities in their anti-bullying procedures and to monitor equality issues inteaching recruitment. work towards ending stigma against people with mental health problems, including discrimination in employment. progressively introduce anonymised cvs so that black and minority ethnic and female candidates are not excluded before the interview stage because of their identity. ensure that the public sector does more to employ more black and minority ethnic employees. strengthen travellers rights to sites and guarantee proper protection of the nomadic lifestyle of travellers while ensuring thatthe lifestyle of the settled population is also protected. enforce penalties against employers who continue to implement unequal pay. work vigorously towards ensuring that all levels of government and public bodies are representative of the diversity of the populations for whom they work. support proposals by the speaker of the house of common to set up an equalities committee.greens in power carry out our policiesstonewall put the green-led brighton council in first place in their 2014 education equality index. stonewall has described the council as leading the way in celebrating difference and supporting lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender students.brighton council also introduced the landmark trans scrutiny panel, looking how to address transphobia in the city. of the 37 initial recommendations, 25 have started or been implemented, including addressing transphobia in schools, allowing genderless honorifics for council documentation and easing access to healthcare for trans people.lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, intersex and queer (lgbtiq) peopledespite recent modest advances, discrimination against lgbtiq people remains in areas such as housing, education, employment and health. the green party supports campaigns to advance lgbtiq rights and aims to build a society where everyone is valued, respected and empowered, regardless of their sexuality or gender identity.we will: legislate to remedy inequality in pension inheritance for same-sex marriage partners and same-sex civil partners. consider reducing the 12-month blood donation deferral period for men who have sex with men, based on individual risk assessment where the donor is identified to be not at risk of passing infections into the blood supply. apologise to and pardon all 50,000100,000 men convicted of consenting adult same-sex relations under anti-gay laws that have now been repealed. provide mandatory hiv, sex and relationship education  age appropriate and lgbtiq inclusive  in all schools from primary level onwards. require every school to have an anti-bullying programme that explicitly combats homophobic, biphobic and transphobic bullying. combat homophobic, biphobic and transphobic violence by ensuring uniform legislation against all forms of hate crime. end the cuts to the nhs, which have undermined hiv services and made it harder for trans people to access genderreassignment services. end the detention of lgbtiq (and other) asylum seekers and the culture of disbelief that often denies them refugee status. challenge criminalisation, discrimination and violence against lgbtiq people in other countries and work in solidarity with campaigners there. press the commonwealth to grant accredited status to a commonwealth lgbtiq association and to urge all member states to end the criminalisation of homosexuality and to protect lgbtiq citizens against discrimination and hate crime.26 for the common good: green party general election manifesto 2015joining up the policiesanti-discrimination policies on their own arent enough. its vital to see the connections between one policy decision and its effects elsewhere in society. cuts and austerity measures have a disproportionate effect on lgbtiq people because of higher levels of reliance on public services due to family estrangement, societal and workplace discrimination, and specific healthcare needs.likewise, cuts in youth, housing and social services are more likely to affect young lgbtiq people, particularly those who are estranged from their families. lgbtiq people are more likely to face unemployment and the impact of this can be much greater because they may not be able to rely on wider social networks. cuts to services for older and disabled people will have a much greater impact on lgbtiq people, who are less likely to have children and will be more reliant on public services.so, restoring the public realm contributes to equality and diversity.womensince 2010, recent progress in advancing womens equality has been undermined and reversed. women are now: poorer  nearly three-quarters of the governments savings have been paid for by women; earning less  the value of low pay in particular is declining, and the pay gap between men and women in their twenties has doubled; over-burdened  as support services have been slashed, women are left carrying the load; and more at risk of gendered violence  because funding for services that support survivors of sexual and domestic violencehas been reduced.this is all a consequence of deliberate government action. the public sector equality duty, which assesses the impact of gove ivered, is designed to solve problems in isolation  the lack of a job or of a place to live, an illness  but problems usually arise together. an alternative approach, based on womens centres, has shown the potential to break down barriers and provide an effective holistic approach that facilitates resilience and recovery for women and their families. the green party would fund the creation of a nationwide set of pilots, and if their early promise turns out to be fulfilled would intend expanding this to a universal nationwide scheme, run in the voluntary sector by women but given secure long-term core funding through local government.we will also: make equal pay for men and women a reality. require 40% of all members of public company and public sector boards to be women. listen to girls and young women about relationships education and about sexism in the media and make personal, social, health and economic education (pshe) a compulsory part of the school curriculum. take steps to tackle media sexism, starting with working with retailers to stop lads mags and other pornography from being sold in supermarkets and newsagents. ensure that the laws to prevent discrimination against women on the grounds of pregnancy and maternity are properly enforced. follow scotlands lead and make it illegal to stop nursing mothers feeding their babies in a public place. ensure consistent long-term funding for a national network of rape crisis centres, spending up to 100 million on thenetwork over the course of the parliament.for the common good: green party general election manifesto 2015 27disabilityinstead of helping disadvantaged people, the coalition has scapegoated and isolated them. private firms assess people on the verge of death as fit for work. the bedroom tax plays havoc with any person who is disabled and needs an extra room for equipment or a carer. austerity has brought cuts to disability benefits, harming the most vulnerable in our society.the green party is committed to the social model of disability. people who are disabled have a right to participate fully in society. we will: support the principles of, and enforce the un convention on the rights of persons with disabilities. end the pernicious system whereby an external contractor assesses whether people are fit for work and return to the systemof relying on the judgement of gps or other health professionals. increase the budget for disability living allowance / personal independence payments by around 1 billion a year. retain the independent living fund, which enables over 18,000 severely disabled people to stay in their home instead of being in residential care, costing around 300 million a year. provide a further 0.5 billion for free social care for adults aged 1865 who have a proven care need. increase the carers allowance by 50%, costing 1.2 billion a year (6.5 million carers save the state 119 billion), and providecarers with a legal right to 510 days paid annual leave. raise the profile of the access to work scheme among smaller firms and under-served disabled people, with far great transparency over how the scheme is administered. provide older carers with more generous and consistent support through a citizens pension. integrate health and care services so as to look after carers as well as those they care for. recognise the rights of children who are disabled, and their families, in education, in the transition to adult life, in childcare, in healthcare and in the benefits system. recognise fully the housing needs of people who are disabled, including support with planning and obtaining housing. make it a licensing condition for taxis that drivers have disability awareness training.young peopleyoung people face very practical immediate problems with getting a good start in life. decent jobs, jobs with a future and training, are hard to come by. the lucky few can get an internship or take advantage of good connections, but overall social mobility is in reverse. you can go to university, but only if you are prepared to saddle yourself with a huge debt. affordable housing is scarce. and threats such as climate change and ever-rising levels of inequality will have a far greater impact on future generations.young people must be supported outside school as well as in it; online and offline. they need places they can call their own, where they can safely play and explore. this means playgroups for toddlers, safe streets for kids to play in, and youth centres for teenagers. the green party would: ensure that the uks child protection systems are effective at tackling child neglect and abuse early on, including changing the law so that emotional abuse is treated on a par with physical abuse and giving police and child protection professionals clear guidance to help them work effectively. set clear targets for ending child poverty, including ways to measure it and fund local authorities properly so they can focus on early support to help children, young people and their families. increase the current investment in young peoples services, providing a comprehensive and inclusive youth service, including youth clubs, youth councils and non-curricular education and training, costing an extra 1.1 billion a year. extend free local public transport to young people and students, spending up to 4 billion a year. this would encourage the habit of using public transport among young people early on, with a view to making this a behaviour for life. support 20 mph zones, cycle schemes and public transport to make our streets safe and useful for young people. raise the age of criminal responsibility from 10 to 14. lower the voting age to 16. reform the judicial system to create a strong statutory presumption against the imprisonment of young offenders. restrict police use of random stop and search powers, which especially damage police relationships with young people. make higher education free and end the student loan system.28for the common good: green party general election manifesto 2015 end the exploitation of interns; ensure no unpaid full-time internship lasts more than four weeks. make renting affordable and possible again for young people through our housing policies, especially those on regulating theprivate rented sector and rents. end the exploitation of young people in low-wage jobs through our living wage policy. keep housing benefit for under 25s. do more for young people who have no family; a basic first step would be to pay foster carers a salary, costing about 0.9 billion a year. provide access to suitable emergency accommodation for the 200,000 young people who go missing every year if they are unable to return home safely. support the right of young people all over europe to go to other parts of the eu to work and broaden their experience. provide more training and work experience for young unemployed people through expanding apprenticeships; specifically,provide an apprenticeship to all qualified young people aged 1625 who do not have one and want one.what green councillors do for young people out of school...in 2012, green councillor simon grover persuaded tory-run st albans, hertfordshire, to pledge to provide a youth centre in the town in the next five years.in malvern, worcestershire, green councillor john raines led the campaign to allow the community to buy a council-owned youth centre earmarked for demolition and housing development. it is now thriving under community ownership.older people and pensionsage used to be respected. now theres the beginning of a backlash against older people, particularly the baby boomer generation approaching their seventies. theyve had it easy, its said  secure jobs, final salary pensions, good health and a housing market that has rewarded them but made it almost impossible for todays young people to get housed. and, as a generation, they have despoiled the planet and their swelling numbers threaten to bankrupt our health and pension systems.the real picture is more complex. there are huge inequalities between older people, and many have had difficult lives. the free university education of the past was a privilege for a tiny group of people. many more working lives were totally disrupted by margaret thatchers assault on manufacturing industry in the 1980s  these older people bear the scars of industrial diseases and health inequalities. many older women in particular have lead lives confined by lack of opportunity.the green partys policy for older people is simple. first they are people, and they have the same rights and hopes as everyone else. they should be treated fairly and equally in employment, education, healthcare and avenues for enterprise. ambition should not be shut off just because we get older.second, there are certain things they should be able to rely on without the indignity of means testing. the most basic is a universal state pension. we would introduce a citizens pension, paid to all pensioners regardless of contribution record from 2016, so no pensioner will live in poverty. it will pay 180 per week to a single pensioner and 310 per week for a couple, taking all pensioners above the poverty line. future increases will be at the higher of the price increases of basic goods and services or average earnings.for the common good: green party general election manifesto 2015 29the failure of private pensions  making pensions secureprivate pension schemes have failed. the 40 billion government subsidy given to private pension schemes in the form of income tax and national insurance reliefs is huge. the performance of the private pensions industry is dismal  the total paid out in private pensions each year is no more than the subsidy that the government gives the industry. we will begin to reform this.we would raise part of the money needed for the citizens pension by abolishing about half of the value of these concessions;the money is better invested in a better pension for all. we would further limit the amount of relief an individual can get on contributions in any one year, so that more of the subsidy goes to the lower paid.we would make saving for retirement safe and predictable, by offering a new state earnings-related pension scheme. this would invest through the green investment bank in long-term public assets such as the railways, renewable energy and the national grid, social and affordable housing, projects sponsored by local authorities, and public facilities such as hospitals. these assets offer a safe, long-term and predictable rate of return  ideal for pensions  and the pension fund will provide the savings needed to invest in these assets. such public assets would replace pension fund assets, many of which consist of shares in energy companies whose main assets are unusable fossil fuel reserves. employers would be obliged to offer and contribute to this pension scheme, as they are now with stakeholder pensions; the default would be for employees to be contracted in to the scheme, and a persons contributions would be unaffected by changes of employer.in addition we will: provide free social care funded by taxation on the same basis as the nhs. keep the pensioners bus pass and winter fuel payment. provide free prescriptions for all and abolish the tv licence, making the current concessions unnecessary. support enforcing the rights of older people through the dignity code. make sure that all pensioners living abroad receive the same pension and annual pension increase as those living in the uk. support 20 mph zones, cycle schemes and public transport to make our streets safe and useful for older as well as young people. keep the nhs a public service, comprehensive and free at the point of delivery, especially recognising that the current generation of older people have paid for it all their lives and are now beginning to need it.as is traditional, we have listed here items that are specifically in the interests of older people. but we hope and believe that many older people will vote with their children and grandchildren in mind as much as themselves, and that they will in particular have in mind the long-term threats to our climate and environment.green councillors look after older people...in 2012, green councillor david brookes was appointed the elderly peoples champion for lancaster city council and has persuaded the council to advertise almshouse charity vacancies on its lettings site and to devote a web page to events and issues for the elderly.in bradford, greens secured 300,000 to fund free cavity wall and loft insulation for older residents.joining up the policiesso what do health, food, equality and transport have to do with each other? we all know that, to be healthy we need to eat well and take more exercise. so if we promote healthy eating, local food, good free school meals and active transport, we will be healthier. and if we are all more equal, not only will we be healthier but more of us will use public transport and standards will rise. and if as a result we are healthier, well be more inclined to get an allotment, walk to the bus stop and get a bus, reducing climate change-producing gases.its a virtuous circle.30 for the common good: green party general election manifesto 2015imagine a national health society. imagine living in a clean environment, with satisfying work, good housing, a balanced diet, a good education, active, safe and sustainable transport, and much greater equality. thisis well-being  so vital to good health. imagine being in no doubt that the health service is publicly funded, with free prescriptions, dentistry and chiropody; one in which you have a human relationship with your doctors and nurses, who make your care their principal aim. a health service in which individual and local knowledge take the place of protocols and pathways, and free social and nursing care is provided for the elderly; one which prizes prompt and local access to care, and encourages a culture of prevention as wellas cure. imagine a system that respects and trusts health professionals and gives them the time, space, training and rewards to do their job. this could be the real health service; it is the green partys joined-up approach to health and well-being.we will end nhs privatisationthe green party believes healthcare shouldnt be bought and sold. all the other parties have encouraged the marketisation and privatisation of provision and this has led to: fragmentation of services, with patients falling into gaps between providers, and poor communication between clinicians; outsourcing, with companies cutting corners to win contracts; cherry-picking of profitable treatments by private providers, leaving the nhs to provide treatments that are not properly funded; and an increase in administration costs of 9% of the nhs budget.we will maintain a publicly funded, publicly provided health service free at the point of use. money spent on health will remain inthe public economy, supporting the nhs rather than going into private companies profits.we will: repeal the health and social care act 2012, and introduce an nhs reinstatement bill restoring the obligation upon the government to provide a comprehensive health service, abolishing competition and the purchaserprovider split, ending market-based commissioning and procurement, re-establishing public bodies, a role for not-for-profit organisations and public accountability, restricting the role of commercial companies, and repealing the right of the secretary of state to close hospitals or departments without effective public participation. promote transparency by ending commercial confidentiality. carry out an investigation into the opaque system of patronage and lobbying that has characterised the privatisationof the nhs.for the common good: green party general election manifesto 2015 31chapter 6health and well-being require nhs staff to declare financial interests that conflict with their role. stop further private finance initiative (pfi) contracts and end the inappropriate sale of nhs assets. seek ways to buy out existing pfi contracts where that would represent good value for money, and set aside up to 5 billion over the parliament to do so. restore the public sector ethos of partnership between staff and patients.caroline lucas opposing the health and social care act 2012 in parliament:the bill opens the way for private companies to determine much of english health care and takes away the governments duties and powers, which is why i believe it should be opposed.either we want an nhs free at the point of delivery and with free eye tests and so forth or we do not. caroline has since introduced the nhs reinstatement bill.we will end health service austeritythe coalition government has not increased funding to keep up with inflation and increasing demand  indeed it has continued efficiency savings. and money has been diverted into the cost of reorganisation and into profits for the private companies now running many services.the result is one in four people going to crowded a&e departments because they could not see a gp quickly enough, and a crisis in mental health care.international comparisons underline that we can spend more  we spend just 9.6% of gdp on health (including private healthcare), the french 11.7%, the germans 11.5% and the usa an astonishing 17.6%.we would: immediately increase the overall nhs budget by 12 billion a year to overcome the current funding crisis, increase investment in mental health care and provide for free dentistry, chiropody and prescriptions in england. thereafter, increase the overall nhs budget annually in real terms by 1.2% to take account of our ageing population. together with the previous item this will raise nhs budgets by about 20 billion by 2020. increase alcohol and tobacco taxes to help fund the annual increases in nhs spending over the parliament. provide free social care as well as free healthcare for older people along the lines of the report from the commission on the future of health and social care in england (barker report), at an additional cost of around 8 billion a year initially but rising to 9 billion by the end of the parliament. provide free social care at the end of life, enabling dying people to choose where they die. we would also: provide accessible, local community health centres that provide a wide range of services, including out-of-hours care. these will help people access healthcare quickly rather than being a replacement for gps. end phony patient choice. for most of us patient choice is much less important than getting good treatment at our local hospital or health centre  which is often, for many, the only practical choice. listen to and work in partnership with third sector organisations that are championing patient care. ensure that all cost-effective treatments are available to all patients who need them. work to ensure that cancer outcomes in the uk are as good as the best in europe. build systems to measure and improve the ecological impact of healthcare, from carbon costings of treatments (building them into the national institute for health and care excellence guidelines), to setting targets on recycling in nhs trusts, and the issue of waste disposal. a colossal amount of material waste is produced through the disposable culture that has taken hold in the fight against hospital-acquired infections.32for the common good: green party general election manifesto 2015green councillors support nhs dentistry...the market town of stowmarket, suffolk, became the first in the county to open a new nhs dentist surgery after a lengthy campaign by green councillors.we will act to prevent illness and expand primary and community carethe green party takes a whole society approach to health. we care about what happens before you access the nhs. get that right, and a lot else falls into place.how to achieve this affects how we organise the health service. those involved in primary and community care  gps, practice nurses, district nurses, health visitors, midwives, counsellors, pharmacists, occupational therapists and all the other community- based professionals  are best placed to prevent ill health from developing in the first place. they can carry out checks and give advice or treatment to people who, for instance, are stressed, obese, inactive, or alcohol or nicotine dependent. intervention by a trusted health professional can make the difference at an individual level. this can often be linked to local services, such as advice centres, opportunities for physical activity, lunch clubs and so on.and its primary care that is most important in dealing with problems before they become acute and require costly and distressing interventions such as admission to hospital. local health professionals can also manage chronic illnesses such as diabetes, respiratory and cardiac conditions and mental illness in ways that are both more patient centred and less expensive than hospital- based care. they are best placed too to integrate medical and social care.where parents want it and there are no medical complications, normal childbirth could take place at home, increasing satisfaction for the woman in labour and reducing costs for the nhs. similarly, many people would prefer to spend their last days at home rather than in hospital and a small increase in community care would save hospital beds and make the experience better for the dying patient, their family and friends.we would therefore place more emphasis on prevention and on primary and community care and less on hospitals.we would: restore the proportion of nhs funding for primary care from the present 7% to 2005 levels (11%) and review the case for increasing it further; we would also ensure that the distribution of funding reflects the local need. always consider whether services currently offered in or by hospitals could be transferred to the community. look for low-tech, local solutions as well as technical advances. encourage cooperation between all the primary care providers, e.g. pharmacies and hearing, optical and old age care organisations. tackle air pollution, which causes an estimated 29,000 premature deaths each year in the uk. uk and eu standards on air pollution are out of date, and we would follow more rigorous standards that respect world health organization guidelines. give special attention to the well-being of children from conception to 2 years old, the first 1001 days. for example, there should be national investment in evidence-based parenting programmes in order to improve the life chances of children and the well-being of families, and a free and universal early education and childcare service should be introduced. extend vat at the standard rate to less healthy foods, including sugar, but spend the money raised on subsidising around one-third of the cost of fresh fruit and vegetables. this could prevent around 5,000 premature deaths every year. put a minimum price on alcohol of 50p per unit. this will reduce the physical, psychological and social harm associated with problem drinking, and will have only a negligible impact on those who drink in moderation. put the uk at the centre of efforts to end the aids, tb and malaria epidemics and the threat they pose to the health of women, men and children living in poverty. treat drug addiction as a health problem rather than a crime, making drugs policy the responsibility of the department of health in order to ensure that resources are targeted at supporting, not punishing, drug users. adopt an evidence-based approach to the step-by-step regulation, starting with cannabis, of the drugs currently banned under the misuse of drugs act as well as legal highs, with a view to introducing a system that reduces harms and brings the market under state control as a potential tax revenue generator. a royal commission or similar body would be established to review currently controlled drug classifications, within a legalised environment of drug use. introduce a regime of presumed consent for organ donation, which respects the right of relatives to refuse consent.for the common good: green party general election manifesto 2015 33 provide the right to an assisted death within a rigorous framework of regulation and in the context of the availability of the highest level of palliative care. end mixed-sex accommodation in hospitals. improve hospital food.we will restore a person-centred approach to the nhspatient care has been damaged by two policies:1. punitive governance based on arbitrary targets;2. over-management by numbers to achieve those targets, leading to a climate of fear among managers and frustration among professionals.the nhs should have the needs of the patient at its heart. ultimately, healthcare is provided by a professional to a person in need. every interaction should begin by connecting with that person to really understand their needs. interventions  from simple advice or booking an appointment, to planning complex medical treatment  will then be more appropriate and efficient, of real value to the user and economic for the organisation.the nhs has been subjected to 20 years of ideological tampering by successive governments (marketisation, targets and performance-related pay) to the point where professionals are often prevented from responding appropriately to an individuals needs. this has also driven up the cost of care. fragmentation of care, especially outsourcing, has led to a loss of continuity, so the human relationship between professional and patient is diluted. professionals can no longer make the overall care of the patient their primary aim. huge amounts of time and money are wasted on failure demand  where the patient goes round in circles trying to get an answer to their problem and often has unnecessary investigations and treatment.more problems are created by so-called economies of scale where, in an attempt to emulate industry, common services have been merged into larger entities regardless of the nature of the variety of demand. individual and local knowledge are lost and problems are dealt with according to protocols and pathways, not what is best for the patient. this has to change. the system must be designed around what the patient needs, not what monitor (the sector regulator for health services in england) or the care quality commission demand. professionals must be given the time to care, rather than ticking governance boxes.the human-centred approach also applies to nhs staff. the vast majority of nhs workers are highly committed, caring and careful individuals, but current systems often put them under stress and prevent them doing the right thing. we need a culture in which all staff are able to shape the system they work in and to openly share learning from mistakes and near misses. it should be a source of pride and joy, not fear and frustration, for those who work in it.the green party would: place the quality of patient care, especially patient safety, at the heart of the system. reducing costs would not be the primary driver of behaviour but would be the outcome of best practice. evolve the best system of care with the help of the service providers. engage, empower and hear patients and carers at all times, treating both with dignity. foster whole-heartedly the growth, development and training of all staff, including their involvement in improving the systems in which they work.green councillors will stand up to fast-food chains...after kfc applied to open a drive-through store close to a primary school in solihull, green councillor andy hodgson persuaded the council to toughen up its planning rules to allow refusal of fast-food chains near schools.the green party listens to knowledge and experience, not political dogmathe introduction to this sub-section has been written by dr jillian creasy, who worked as a gp in sheffield for 25 years. it draws on her real experience of the nhs over that time. jillian is also green party health spokesperson and candidate for sheffield central.34for the common good: green party general election manifesto 2015 embrace transparency in the interests of sharing best practice, accountability and cooperation. use quantitative data to better understand how the system is working, not to set targets, and to see them as a route tocontinuously improving patient care, not an end in themselves. ensure that there are clear lines of responsibility, especially for safety and interdepartmental cooperation. respect the nhs pay review body and bring nhs pay back in line with inflation and negotiate improved conditions. expand the workforce to drive the wholesale improvement of mental health services.the extra funding proposed for the nhs and social care will create a total of 400,000 jobs. we will tackle the crisis of our time: mental healththere has been an alarming rise in mental health problems in recent years, especially among young people. according to nhs england, mental illness accounts for 28% of illness but only 13% of nhs spending. in the course of a year, one in four adults experiences some form of mental ill health. if you have diabetes theres a 92% chance youll get treatment. if you have a mental illness, that chance goes down to 28%. around 70% of prisoners have two or more mental health conditions. the governments own chief medical officer says mental health should be given greater priority.it will take time to train more staff and expand services but the green party will put an end to mental healths cinderella status and achieve parity of esteem by 2020.we will: ensure that spending on mental health care rises within our overall commitment to increase real spending on health. ensure that no one waits more than 28 days for access to talking therapies. ensure that everyone experiencing a mental health crisis, including children and young people, should have safe and speedy access to quality care, 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. the use of police cells as places of safety for children should be eliminated by 2016, and by the end of the next parliament should only occur for adults in exceptional circumstances. ensure that everyone who requires a mental health bed should be able to access one in their local nhs trust area, unless they need specialist care and treatment. if specialist care is required, then this should be provided within a reasonable distance of where the patient lives. implement a campaign to end the discrimination and stigma associated with mental health through supporting the time for change programme and offering employment support to those with mental health problems. invest in dementia services, ensuring that support is available for all affected by this debilitating disease, including families and carers. pay special attention to any mental health issues of mothers during and after pregnancy, children and adolescents, black and minority ethnic people, refugees, the lgbtiq communities and ex-service people and their families. improve access to addiction services, including both drugs and alcohol addiction. give higher priority to the physical healthcare of those with mental health problems.joining up the policiesso what do mental health, drugs, crime and welfare have to do with each other? our current welfare system breeds desperation and stress, not security, causing mental health problems. ending workfare and making work pay better will bring security and encourage better mental health. mental health problems foster drug dependency and crime. if we can improve mental health, drug use and crime rates will fall. with lower drug use and crime, and a supportive welfare system, more people will find useful things to do, improving their mental health.its another virtuous circle.for the common good: green party general election manifesto 2015 35imagine free universal early education and childcare, with compulsory education starting at 7. smaller classes and free nutritious lunches. more opportunity for outdoor education. more trust in teachers. less teaching to the test and the abolition of sats and league tables. accountability at local level. apprenticeships for 1625 year olds who want them. the restoration of the education maintenance allowance for 1617 year olds and the abolition of university tuition fees. imagine schools and colleges fit for children and young adults. education is good for each of us, but it is also good for all of us  its a common good. thats why the green party will make education free for everyone up to and including university or equivalent.early years education and childcarealthough the single most important factor for a childs development is the learning environment at home, high-quality pre-school education can make a big difference. the government has focused on lower-quality childcare, which has little or no effect. moreover, disadvantaged children who attend settings with children from mixed social backgrounds make more progress than those in settings serving mainly disadvantaged children. these findings are why we want to create a universal high-quality early years education system used by everyone, to give every child the best possible start.great credit is due to the previous labour government for its sure start childrens centres. but too many of these have closed as a result of austerity. although support for childcare has grown under the coalition, the government provides scant support to parents in the first two years of a childs life, and too much of the emphasis for the next three years is on expanding free and subsidised childcare so that parents, especially women, can work. too little attention is paid to the child and to the value ofearly education.the green party proposes to extend the education system to provide a free, universal and flexible system of good-quality early education and support for parents from birth until the age of compulsory education.we would:36for the common good: green party general election manifesto 2015build a free but voluntary universal early education and childcare service for all children from birth until compulsory education age, which we would raise to 7 years.integrate this into the local education service, run by local education authorities, and build on existing infant schools. local authorities would be would be given freedom as to how to do so in the light of their local circumstances.chapter 7a place to learn: education ensure that the system includes childrens centres for the very youngest children and their parents, and childcare and early education for children from age 1. ensure that those who lead early years education are qualified teachers with qualified teacher status and with specialist knowledge of early years education; and ensure all other staff are qualified to level 3. encourage parents to participate in helping to run the service. ensure that parents would receive much increased child benefit from 2016 and would continue to receive statutory maternityand paternity pay.we estimate that in the longer run this will cost around 8 billion a year over and above the cost of the existing free andsubsidised schemes and tax concessions, which would be abolished.schoolsteachers feel undervalued and their professionalism is undermined by a strict curriculum. two-fifths of teachers quit within five years of beginning their careers, ground down by an excessive workload, much of it unrelated to teaching.the green party believes that children are over-assessed and teachers are over-regulated. teaching to the test is not satisfying teaching and its boring for students, yet thats what successive governments have obliged teachers to do. we need to free teachers and pupils to rediscover the excitement of learning, released from the shackles of a system designed with only economic competitiveness and preparation for work in mind, and with excessive teacher workloads burdened by bureaucracy.we are determined to make schools fit for children rather than the other way round. in line with green party principles, decisions around education will be taken at the most local level possible, but in general we support: democratic accountability and a key role for local authorities in planning, admissions policy and equality of access for children with special needs. a comprehensive system of local schools offering mixed-ability teaching and staffed by qualified teachers, and the integration of grammar schools into the comprehensive system. restoring education current and capital funding to 2010 levels in real terms (costing around 7 billion a year) and distributing it fairly among local authorities, reflecting the core costs of education, pupil needs, the quality of existing school buildings and equity between school types. with the new early education service above, and counting the expansion of apprenticeships below this, would create around a quarter of a million jobs. action to reduce teacher workload and introduce professional pay levels for all teachers. ending the marketisation and outsourcing of education. leaving local education authorities free to decide how much to allocate to current spending and how much to capital projects. class sizes of 20, costing 1.5 billion over the parliament. the integration of academies and free schools into the local authority system. academic learning from 6 years old, with earlier years education focusing on play, social cohesion and confidence-building, and compulsory education beginning at age 7. the abolition of sats and league tables and the evaluation of schools by parents, teachers and the local community, not ofsted (the office for standards in education, childrens services and skills), which we would abolish, reducing the accountability-related workload. a broad, balanced and enriching curriculum, including creative and vocational areas, and making pshe (including sex and relationships education, and also first aid) compulsory, with a coherent 1619 qualifications framework allowing a real choice of academic and vocational areas, or a mixture of them. an increase in outdoor education and physical activity so children establish an early and strong relationship with their local environment. the right for every child who is disabled to a mainstream education. the removal of charitable status from private schools, with a view to absorbing them into the state system, but neverthelessensuring that no schools are run for profit. we will phase out public funding of schools run by religious organisations. schools may teach about religions, but should not encourage adherence to any particular religious beliefs. home education and flexi-schooling.for the common good: green party general election manifesto 2015 37 free nutritious lunches, with local and gm-free ingredients, and children involved in growing, preparing and cooking food where possible. the number of infants eating school lunches since the current free meals were introduced has increased from just 300,000 to 1,640,530 now. the extension will cost an additional 2 billion a year. ensuring that all schools that serve particular vulnerable communities, for example the jewish, muslim or sikh communities, are adequately protected from sectarian attacks. an end to the trend whereby parents have to buy as extras equipment needed at school or for participation on expensive school trips.caroline lucas on personal, social, health and economic educationin parliament, green mp caroline lucas led on making sure that all young people get taught high-quality pshe (personal, social, health and economic education). she introduced a bill in parliament to require all schools to teach the subject and for teachers to get proper training and support. good pshe is key to ending violence against women and girls and also has significant knock-on benefits for both academic attainment and future employability. statutory pshe is supported by the national union of teachers, mumsnet, stonewall, girlguiding, everyday sexism and the royal college of nursing, among others.further education and skills trainingwe will: oppose the privatisation of further education and return further education colleges to the democratic control of local government. reverse the trend whereby 45% of apprenticeships, that is, jobs with structured training, are now taken by people over 25. we would reinstate the governments duty to provide an apprenticeship to all qualified young people aged 1619 who do not have one and want one, but extend it to age 25, and increase funding for apprenticeships by 30%. restore the education maintenance allowance for 16 and 17 year olds. provide the further education sector with 1.5 billion a year extra funding. connect universities with local schools and colleges through nationwide widening participation programmes. encourage local authorities to use some of the additional money we propose to give to them to restore a full range of local adult education programmes. end the anomaly whereby schools and academies can reclaim vat on goods and services whereas sixth form colleges and further education colleges cannot, by allowing the latter to claim, costing around 170 million a year. prioritise training in the skills needed to build a low-carbon economy.greens in power carry out our policieseducation in brighton & hove was for long a major concern to parents in the city, but since the greens came to office results have improved. the 2013 gcse results were the best ever, though they fell in 2014 after tougher marking was introduced across the country. a level results continued to improve in 2014. and 80% of sixth forms and colleges are good or outstanding as judgedby ofsted.38for the common good: green party general election manifesto 2015higher educationhigher education is in crisis. the fundamental purpose of universities should be to promote critical enquiry, social innovation and cultural renewal. but these aims have been sidelined in an atmosphere of increasing managerialism and commercialisation.higher education is vital to our cultural health. it should be concerned with public engagement and increasing social participation, not considered merely a production line for enhancing the earning power of individuals. the current focus on research outputs in the narrow definition used by the research excellence framework  means that the crucial role of lecturers as teachers has been denigrated. this emphasis needs to be reversed.the conservative-led coalition and the labour party bear responsibility for the current system of university funding, which is largely dependent on tuition fees that now stand at 9,000 a year for undergraduates. this was a betrayal of a promise and has blighted the future of thousands of young people who now graduate with a debt of at least 45,000.with the removal of public funding from most undergraduate and all postgraduate courses, uk universities are now all but privatised. the only people to benefit from the current system are university vice-chancellors and senior bureaucrats, who award themselves massive pay rises, while those on the ground who carry out teaching and research face ever more punishing terms and conditions of employment. in practice, this severely compromises the quality of education through reduced student-contact hours with overstretched staff.zero-hours contracts are now commonplace and shocking disparities in pay characterise every campus, especially among service workers, who are commonly denied a living wage. conversely, university administrative departments continue to swell as money is routinely wasted on copying expensive private sector practices  including ludicrous rebranding exercises  in search of market share. the future of the arts and the humanities has been endangered by a systematic denigration by the dominant political parties and university administrations alike, who create a perception of such courses as an expensive luxury without the vocational use-value that renders them worth the financial risk. the green party believes that the arts and humanities have an essential part to play in creating a more democratic, sane and participatory society.the situation for mature students is even more dire. over the past five years, every continuing education department in the uk has been scaled back or closed down altogether, often as a managerial response to caps on students numbers and diminished funding for the sector as a whole. adults wishing to return to education are faced with a situation where short courses and part-time study are considered not cost-effective in market terms.allied to this, the cost of studying the qualifications that universities stipulate as entry requirements is prohibitive. an a level for those who are not registered as school or college students attracts a fee of several hundred pounds. access to education diplomas are also meshed within a loan system for those over the age of 24, and uniformly cost in excess of 3,000. the part-time and short courses for which non-traditional applicants can enrol are often hugely expensive, especially when measured against the contact-time with lecturers.lifelong learning is a phrase that is much used by politicians and education professionals. giving people the opportunity to be second chance learners should be a crucial part of what universities offer to wider society. countering the monetisation of higher education across the entire sector is vital to reverse the destructive and wasteful market model of university education.in december 2010, just after the trebling of tuition fees, caroline lucas mp argued that the costs of a free higher education could be met by increasing corporation tax for larger companies to the level paid in other g7 countries and ring-fencing someof that money. businesses depend enormously on graduates skills and knowledge, so its only fair that they invest in the higher education system from which they benefit.for the common good: green party general election manifesto 2015 39the green party would address this through: ending undergraduate tuition fees. we appreciate that the current level of applications to study at university reflects the paucity of other opportunities available to young people. this is part of a wider social problem that must be tackled. to be saddled with a huge debt for the right to access higher education at the beginning or middle of adulthood is neither ethical nor sustainable. because of the way the student loans system works this would cost about 4.5 billion over this parliament, and in the long run around 8 billion a year. cancelling student debt issued by the student loans company and held by the government. taking account of the loans that it is expected would never be re-paid, the total value of these loans is estimated to be around 30 billion. assuming that these loans would be paid off over the next 25 years, and taking account of interest, this amounts to around 2.2 billion a year in revenue that the government would not receive. reintroducing student grants costing 2.2 billion over the parliament. in the longer run we would support student living costs through the basic income. in the longer term, considering scrapping fees for academic postgraduate courses. restoring access to lifelong learning by supporting mature students and their families. we will reverse the 20-yearprogramme of dismantling the lifelong learning sector. reintroducing the block grant to universities. it is essential that teaching and learning can be supported effectively across the sciences and the humanities. encouraging universities and pension funds such as the universities superannuation scheme to divest from fossil fuel companies. this would follow the example of the university of glasgow. supporting the 10:1 fair pay campus campaign. we are committed to ending the scandal of vice-chancellors paying themselves 300,000 a year while cleaners on the national minimum wage have to resort to food banks.green councillors support apprenticeships...greens in brighton have made it standard practice for apprenticeships and training schemes to be included in all council construction contracts.40 for the common good: green party general election manifesto 2015want to rent? want to buy? struggling to do either? it doesnt have to be this way. the green party has policies to make housing affordable and sustainable, to make sure there is enough to go round, and to provide better quality and greater security in the private rented sector. a secure and affordable place to live is one of our most basic human needs. but houses and flats are now sites of speculation rather than simply somewhere to call home. they were at the heart of the crash seven years ago, when reckless lending left banks unable to support themselves. we need to return housing to its original purpose: providing us  each and every one of us  with affordable and sustainable shelter.there are three reasons for the current chaos and unfairness: a misplaced faith in the market as the way to meet housing needs, where the market for houses has too often reflected a desire to make an investment rather than buy a place to live, and prices have risen faster than inflation; a lack of investment in public housing for at least 20 years, following right to buy and restrictions on what local authorities can do; and a private rented sector where too often people have insecurity of tenure and are being charged extortionate rents for unsatisfactory housing.caroline lucas and housingin july 2014 caroline lucas mp introduced a housing (affordability, supply and tenant protection) bill to highlight the problems faced by private tenants.the bill required the secretary of state to commission a programme of research into reducing rent levels in the private rented sector, improving terms and conditions for tenants, increasing housing supply, and providing a large-scale programme of sustainable council housing in england.caroline has published a housing charter, suggesting how these national policies would help in brighton. you can find it here: http://www.carolinelucas.com/assets/files/localparties/brighton/publications/caroline/caroline%20lucas%20housing%20 charter%20(2).pdf; or http://tinyurl.com/m8xh4g3for the common good: green party general election manifesto 2015 41chapter 8a place to live: housingthe housing market: house price stabilityhouse prices continue to rise quicker than wages and inflation, and first-time buyers find it almost impossible to buy a home. if wages had gone up by as much as house prices since 1997, the average person would be earning almost 30,000 more a year.when house prices crash there are consequences for the whole economy.the green party will aim for house price stability by making property investment and speculation less attractive and by increasing housing supply. we will: give the bank of england the powers it has requested to limit the size of mortgages in relation to the property value and the borrowers income. take steps to ensure that development is more evenly distributed across the whole of the country, so reducing pressure on housing in the south east in particular. make buy to let less attractive, so reducing pressure on house prices, by removing tax incentives, including the deduction of mortgage interest as an expense, and reforming the wear and tear allowance. introduce new higher council tax bands for more expensive homes, with higher rates for empty homes. scrap the governments help to buy scheme, which does nothing to help those in the greatest housing need and contributesto excessive demand, saving 600 million a year. take action on empty homes to bring them back into use. there are about 700,000 empty homes. halve this number through empty property use orders. gradually phase out stamp duty land tax and consider a land value tax. minimise encroachment onto undeveloped greenfield sites wherever possible by reusing previously developed sites thathave fallen into disuse. reduce vat on housing renovation and repair work (including insulation) to 5%, costing 1.6 billion a year. at present there is no vat on constructing new dwellings but there is vat at 20% on converting and renovating old buildings to be used as homes. this encourages new building at the expense of saving land and using what we have. introduce the right to rent (where local councils step in to help those in difficulty with their mortgage to rent their home). one- third of mortgage borrowers are expected to struggle if interest rates increase by 2%. break up the big builder cartels and diversify the house-building industry so that more homes are built by small- and medium-sized builders and by community-led and cooperative initiatives. in the short term we would achieve this by measures including bringing transparency to the land market, the transfer of public land into community land trusts, and parcelling big regeneration sites into smaller plots through the custom build model.42 for the common good: green party general election manifesto 2015public housing: providing 500,000 new social rented homessuccessive governments affordable and social housing policies have failed. there is not enough housing for those unable to afford either to buy or to pay market rents. the time has come to reverse the decline of council housing, started by the right to buy.we would: provide 500,000 social rented homes to high sustainability standards by increasing the social housing budget from 1.5 billion a year to 6 billion a year in the lifetime of the parliament, removing borrowing caps from local councils, and creating 35,000 jobs. devolve housing benefit budgets to councils, so they can design packages that improve access to housing in their local market and enable them to provide more council housing. end mass council house sales and the right to buy at a discounted price. provide more rights for homeless people, giving local authorities the same duties with regard to single people and childless couples as to families, and ending the practice of declaring people intentionally homeless. aim to end rough sleeping completely, and give public authorities a duty to prevent it. oppose new arms length management organisations and ensure genuine tenant participation in existing ones.greens in power carry out our housing policiesin green-led brighton: in november 2012 brighton council introduced a new licensing scheme by which private landlords letting a property for sharing by three or more people must bring it up to an agreed standard. more than 1,500 licences were applied for by april 2014. by july 2014 the green-led council had brought some 416 council homes and more than 460 empty private homes back into use. by november 2014 greens had overseen the delivery of 389 affordable homes (as part of wider residential and mixed developments). another 130 are due to be completed before may 2015. in the green partys term of administration it will have overseen the building of 639 homes. a further 681 affordable homes, including more than 200 new council homes, are in the development pipeline. for the first time in living memory, communal heating bills in some brighton & hove council blocks have fallen as council tenants benefit from a major programme of energy efficiency retro-fitting.for the common good: green party general election manifesto 2015 43make renting normal and not a rip-offthere is a place for a private rented sector. but experience shows that it needs to be well regulated and the difference in power between landlord and tenant corrected. we would: reform the private rented sector by introducing a living rent tenancy (including five-year fixed tenancy agreements), smart rent control that caps annual rent increases linked to the consumer price index, security of tenancy and local not-for-profit letting agencies, and abolishing letting agents fees and insurance-based deposit schemes. set up a living rent commission to explore whether controls could bring rents more in line with local average incomes. introduce a mandatory licensing scheme for landlords. abolish landlord perks, such as tax deductions against a variety of expenditures, including mortgage interest relief. ending mortgage interest tax relief alone will raise 5.8 billion a year. increase the supply of small lets by raising the tax-free amount under the rent a room scheme to 7,250 a year. abolish the bedroom tax, which has saved less than 400 million a year. a department for work and pensions report foundthat more than half of affected tenants have cut back on essentials, and only 1 in 20 has downsized. bring housing benefit for all age groups back in line with average market rents, so that it provides all citizens with the means to meet their housing costs, costing 2.3 billion a year. subject the shared accommodation rate to a comprehensive review to ensure it reflects the real cost of renting shared properties. change the definition of affordable rented housing to depend on local median incomes and not on local market rents.the bedroom taxthe under occupancy charge  the bedroom tax  came into effect in april 2013. it affects nearly 500,000 people  the equivalent of a city the size of leicester. two-thirds of those affected are disabled. cash-strapped housing associations have spent millions helping affected tenants. by february 2014, two-thirds of residents hit by the bedroom tax were in rent arrears. the tories devised it, the lib dems backed it and ed miliband took a year to decide he didnt like it. green mp caroline lucas has voted against the bedroom tax at every opportunity.green councillors and homelessness...in solihull, green councillor chris williams publicised the plight of a woman who had just had a heart transplant and her 14-year- old daughter who were forced to live in a private hotel for 18 months with rats running through their room as they slept. since then solihull has reduced the use of b&bs to house the homeless.44 for the common good: green party general election manifesto 2015imagine a world of sustainable prosperity for all, one in which secure, satisfying, decently paid jobs are the norm. where the power to create money is taken out of private hands and democratised for public benefit. imagine going to a peoples bank, confident that it is working for you rather than for its shareholders. imagine that you and everyone else are being taxed with fairness and sustainability in mind, and that tax is actually collected. imagine working in a more mixed and localised economy. imagine a revival of workers rights and vibrant trade unions. imagine knowing that almost half of national income is spent on the common good  on the ties that bind us together  rather than on paying down debts you didnt cause.this is the common wealth we create by working together, sharing the fruits of our work fairly and building the infrastructure of our common life. right now, society is too unequal, too much valuable work goes unrecognised, and our infrastructure is not fit for a common and sustainable life. the green partys proposals will make for a fairer and more sustainable society.workpeople want to work and the green party believes in helping make that happen. we also believe everyone should be properly paid for the work they do, ending working poverty and the job insecurity that has people lining up outside food banks and left at the mercy of payday lenders. we dont just need jobs, we need more worthwhile secure jobs.under the coalition, 1 million jobs have been lost from the public sector  from the nhs, from schools and colleges, from local government, from the institutions that bind us together, from front-line services. we will put them back.the coalition claims to have created 2.5 million jobs in the private sector to compensate. but: many job-market casualties have turned to self-employment, where life can be precarious and salaries low (there has been a 20% fall in the salaries of the self-employed since 2007, compared with a 6% fall in employee earnings); 15% of the workforce is self-employed. for some this is by choice, for others it is because they cant get better work; many new jobs are insecure, poorly paid and with contracts that fail to balance the rights and responsibilities of employersand employees; the young in particular suffer, with one in three young workers now on low pay; and theyve redefined some jobs out of the public and into the private sector.in place of this workplace lottery, the green party proposes a package for sustainable prosperity: ending austerity, expanding and renewing public services such as social care, transport and social housing, investing in energy conservation and sustainable resource use, and promoting green public works for environmental benefit. this will create 1 million new satisfying jobs and training places within a year.for the common good: green party general election manifesto 2015 45chapter 9creating common wealth: work, money, industry and taxgreen councillors support the living wage...in lewisham, norwich, lancashire, camden, worcester, stroud and brighton & hove, minority green councillors successfully campaigned for a living wage to help tackle poverty.we will: increase the minimum wage so that it is a living wage. we propose a minimum wage target for everyone who is working in the uk of 10 per hour by 2020. in 2015 this would mean a minimum wage of 8.10 an hour generally (and 9.40 in london), saving 2.4 billion a year in tax credits and generating an additional 1.5 billion a year in income tax and national insurance. this would be offset by 0.7 billion a year additional costs in the public sector. revive the role of democratic trade unions, including the right to belong to a union and have the employer recognise it, and the right to take industrial action, including strikes and peaceful picketing. phase in a 35-hour week. apart from improving the quality of our lives, this would combat unemployment by sharing available work out more equitably. provide a comprehensive nationwide system of good-quality pre-school early education and childcare, free at the point of delivery. end exploitative zero-hours contracts. end the exploitation of interns, and ensure no unpaid full-time internship lasts more than four weeks. make equal pay for men and women a reality. introduce a maximum pay ratio of 10:1 between the best paid and the worst paid in every organisation. end blacklisting. we will set up a full investigation into blacklisting in the construction industry and consider the creation of a new criminal offence. give workers a greater say in the running of their companies, including employee-elected directors in medium and larger companies. reduce employment tribunal fees so that tribunals are accessible to workers.financethe uk finance industry is a disaster area. far from generating genuine wealth, its recklessness and greed created the greatest recession since the 1930s, which in turn contributed to the present regime of austerity and cuts to public services.it has presided over other failures, from the mis-selling of endowment mortgages and payment protection insurance, to the appallingly low returns and high charges of the state-subsidised private pensions industry, its failure to mobilise long-term finance for renewable energy and its collusion in and creation of a whole industry of tax avoidance and evasion.meanwhile, those who work in the industry at senior level show no signs of remorse and continue to pocket huge salaries and bonuses. finance needs root and branch reform. we would: move towards creating all national currency through a national monetary authority, answerable to parliament. the power to create money must be taken out of the hands of private banks. detailed proposals are set out in the regaining control of our money box. separate retail and investment banking. retail banks should be required to limit their role to taking deposits and making loans that facilitate economic activity; investment banks should take the form of partnerships rather than limited companies. introduce controls on bank lending. act to control payday lenders and offer alternatives (see the greens in power credit union box). we will use the government-owned royal bank of scotland to create a network of local banks for every city and region, ensuring that each bank is a peoples bank, obliged to offer cheap basic banking services.greens in power carry out our policiesthe green-led administration in brighton cut the chief executives salary and raised the pay of the lowest grades, bringing the ratio between the highest and lowest paid council staff to just over 10:1.46 for the common good: green party general election manifesto 2015 invest 2 billion in a network of community banks, mutually owned and serving local areas or particular groups. expand the role and the funds of the green investment bank by offering green individual savings accounts and pensions,allowing the bank to borrow and boosting the equity in the bank by 9 billion over the parliament. introduce a robin hood tax (a financial transaction tax) to reduce destabilising speculation (see the taxes section below for details). work for the abolition of the city of london corporation and the special statuses it enjoys. greens in power carry out our policiesthe green-led administration in brighton invested 100,000 in a local credit union, partly to help it set up an online system for residents to access loans, making the credit union as accessible as high-interest payday lenders. it also banned such lenders from advertising on council billboards.in 2013 green mp caroline lucas worked with east sussex credit union to show ministers how to help credit unions fulfil their potential by, for example, ending the restrictions that put them at a competitive disadvantage when compared with banks.regaining control of our moneyone of the most fundamental tasks of government is maintenance of the currency. without stable money accepted by all we cant buy and sell things or plan for the future. inflation in particular makes it hard to take the long-term view that the environmental crisis demands.most people believe that our money is currently created by the nationalised bank of england. it isnt. a pound in your bank account is no more than a promise by the bank to pay you that pound; you dont actually own any publicly created money. in fact, commercial banks create new money (in the sense of money in bank accounts) whenever they make loans, and that money disappears when the loan is paid back.the fact that the size of our money supply  the total amount of money in circulation  is dependent upon millions of separate commercial lending decisions by banks makes it hard to maintain economic stability. during the great recession of the past few years, the unwillingness of banks to make new loans and the desire of people to pay down their debts has meant that the money supply has shrunk, and the government has had to resort to the emergency policy of printing money (called quantitative easing) to prevent an even worse slump.we believe that the time has come to recognise that the creation of currency and the control of the money supply is far too important to be left to profit-seeking private sector banks and should be brought back under the democratic control of the state. quantitative easing was but a first step. commercial banks should be no more than the custodians of publicly created money in current accounts, and the creation of that money should become the function of a new monetary authority, independent of day-to- day government control. this policy would protect ordinary bank accounts, and allow banks to fail safely separate ordinary and investment business provide some control on overall lending and debtthis would be a massive and complex change to our banking system, with many ramifications, and its implementation, involving many years of consultation, legislation and the creation of transitional arrangements, would not be appropriate for one parliament. but we would take the first steps of preparing detailed proposals and consulting upon them, and green mps will press this issue in the next parliament.the change to the new system would create a new and substantial cash flow for the government, which could be spent on social and environmental priorities and assist in paying down the national debt.for the common good: green party general election manifesto 2015 47changing economic organisationsmost economic activity takes place in limited companies, many of them vast multinational organisations. the way they are run has a huge effect on our lives, yet their workers, customers and suppliers have no say in them. even shareholders are often remote, and their connection with a company, and responsibility for what it has done, can be severed overnight by the simple act of selling their shares.the economy would be better, more stable and more responsive if there was (a) much greater diversity of economic models and (b) more control by those most directly involved in some of the economic organisations we already have. we would: encourage small firms, which are more embedded in their local communities and provide less opportunity for creating huge disparities of income and wealth. amend company law to ensure that medium and large companies take account of and report on the environmental and social impact of their activities. amend company law to ensure that medium and large companies have employee and consumer representatives on their boards. ensure that companies house actually collects data due from companies and has accurate data on their beneficial ownership. set local authorities free to run local enterprises for their own communities. support social enterprise. introduce a cooperative development fund managed by community banks to finance new and expanding cooperatives, alongside a much more comprehensive nationwide network of cooperative development bodies providing the necessary education, training and legal support. grant employees the legal right in certain circumstances to buy out their companies (funded by the green investment bank) and turn them into workers cooperatives; or, for example, grant the right to turn sporting clubs, in particular football clubs, into community and supporter cooperatives by giving powers for season ticket holders backed by the local community to take over the running of a club. expand cooperative education, teaching young people the history of cooperatives as well as how to set them up in practice. we will ensure business qualifications will give the same emphasis to cooperative and mutual business models as to other private enterprises.small firms and the local economythe uk economy needs to be more local. transporting basic foodstuffs all over the planet when they can be grown and soldnear to home adds to greenhouse gas emissions and reduces security of supply. local businesses are more responsive to local communities and are often better employers than remote, large ones. income differences are smaller in small firms. if poorer people are better off, they tend to spend their extra income locally. so greens champion small businesses and the local economy, and our green mp caroline lucas was an official parliamentary champion of the federation of small businesses.we will: make it easier for small businesses to employ people and contribute towards paying the living wage by using receipts from awealth tax to reduce employers national insurance in the longer run to 8%. improve the competitive position of small firms, maintaining corporation tax for small firms at 20% while raising that forlarger firms to 30%. increase access to finance by investing 2 billion in a network of community banks, mutually owned and serving local areas or particular groups. reduce the tax on conviviality and help small businesses in the tourism and restaurant businesses by lowering vat to the reduced rate (5%) for cooked food, entertainment and accommodation, costing 6 billion a year. keep trade local by allowing local authorities to favour local procurement to help their local economy. ensure that legislation requiring that small businesses should be paid on time is properly enforced. in the longer run, simplify paye through our basic income proposals. encourage greater diversity among entrepreneurs, including young people, women, ex-service people, the previously unemployed, people who are disabled and older people.48for the common good: green party general election manifesto 2015 ensure that the great majority of honest small businesses can compete fairly with the less scrupulous by cracking down on tax evasion, especially in the informal economy and through non-payment of vat. give bt and other public telecommunications operators an obligation to provide affordable high-speed broadband-capable infrastructure to every small business.green mep lobbies for vat exemption for small firmsmolly scott cato mep has been lobbying in europe for vat exemption for micro-businesses. this follows new european vat rules on digital products sold in the eu making vat chargeable in the place of purchase rather than in the place of supply. micro- businesses are now therefore obliged to collect vat from up to 28 different eu states at 75 different rates. rules designed to ensure that corporations pay fair taxes have entangled many tiny enterprises, and the complexity of administration involved is putting them at risk. molly has called for a vat exemption for businesses with a turnover of less than 100,000 across the whole of europe. many micro-businesses have welcomed her intervention; small businesses are responsible for around 80% of jobs across the eu.taxestax is not a punishment and it is not stealing by the state. it is our money, spent on our behalf by the government we elect. tax redistributes wealth and pays for services that are important to us all. there are services we share but dont always use, such as roads, healthcare and schools. we dont all drive, we dont all go to the doctor and we dont all have children. but we know these things are important for our common life: sharing these things binds us together. taxation pays for them. and, to be fair, taxation needs to be progressive, taking proportionately more from those most able to pay.what should we spend, and on what?how much should we decide together to spend on the common good, and how much should be left for individuals to spend for themselves? the pressure in the uk in recent years from the main three parties has been for the state to tax less and spend less, culminating in the dismantling of public services in the name of austerity.but we need to put this in a wider context, in both space and time. different countries spend different amounts of their national income on public goods. the table below compares the green party plan, set out in this manifesto, of 45% of gdp spent on public goods with other european countries and the usa, and with the planned decline in investment in the public sphere in the uk. every percentage drop represents an assault on the ties that bind us together, on support for those who most need it and on investment in a democratic, just and sustainable economy.country% of gdp spent on public goodsunited states41spain42germany45belgium53france56denmark58uk 201047uk 2015 (planned)39uk 2020 (planned)36green party plan45for the common good: green party general election manifesto 2015 49and the level of spending on the common good has changed over time, responding to changing circumstances. in 1900, uk government spending was just 14% of gdp. much of that was defence; there was no welfare state. spending climbed to 57% in 1918, the last year of the first world war. during the inter-war years spending fell back to around 27%, only to climb to a new peak of 70% at the end of the second world war. with the creation of the welfare state, spending fell back less after the second world war, and has moved between 38% and 46% in the past 20 years.what do the cuts mean? after george osbornes 2014 autumn statement, the director of the independent institute for fiscal studies asked how will these cuts be implemented? is this a fundamental reimagining of the role of the state?the answer is yes. the coalition used to say that it was cutting out of necessity. but this pretence was dropped in 2013 when david cameron admitted that his commitment to cuts was ideological and permanent: we are sticking to the task... this... means building a leaner, more efficient state. we need to do more with less. not just now, but permanently. now we know what this means: more for the rich, less for the poor.there are three reasons for a fundamental shift to increased taxation and spending: to reverse the politically inspired, damaging and unnecessary cuts in public services we have faced in recent years; to improve these services in key areas such as early education and social care for older people; to meet the challenge of building an entirely new sustainable economy in a world where the private incentives of the market are simply not up to the job.almost half our income for the common good? thats what sustainability and equity require.so the first purpose of taxation is to pay for the things we do in common, and to redistribute income and wealth between us. but there is a second purpose. taxing something discourages us from buying or doing it. tax on tobacco reduces smoking. exempting the tax on something encourages us. the exemption of aviation from fuel taxes was instituted long ago in the early days of flying to encourage aviation. we need to use taxation to encourage sustainability and discourage unsustainability.finally, for a tax system to be seen to be fair, everyone must pay their tax. the tax gap  that is, tax that is illegally evaded, legally avoided by exploiting loopholes, or for which collection is abandoned  is estimated to amount to more than 120 billion a year. thats more than the deficit, expected to be 75 billion in 2015. its more than 30 times the total of benefit fraud, and twice the net cost ofa basic income scheme. the green party is the only party with the political will to make the system fair, to collect unpaid taxes andto challenge powerful tax dodging both in the grey economy and by huge corporations. recent governments cant be serious about collecting tax fairly and efficiently when hmrc staff have been cut from 93,000 in 2004 to just 52,000in 2015.tax dodgingcaroline lucas mp secured a debate with the exchequer secretary to the treasury (mr david gauke) in order to champion a fair tax mark, much like the fair trade mark, to be awarded to companies that take their tax responsibilities seriously.meanwhile, in europe, molly scott cato mep worked with other greens on the european parliaments economics committee to ensure that there will be a full parliamentary inquiry into the scandal of corporate tax avoidance, ensuring that multinational companies will pay the taxes governments need to pay for infrastructure and public services.also, as a member of the european parliaments tax working group, molly scott cato is working to achieve an end to the exemption of aviation fuel from taxation.green mps will lead on bringing a tax dodging bill before the next parliament.thats the green partys tax policy in a nutshell: tax for fairness and to redistribute income and wealth, and tax for sustainability.to make taxation fairer we would: introduce a wealth tax of 2% a year on the top 1% (see the wealth tax box) to raise about 25 billion a year by the end of the parliament. we accept that such a tax would need to be phased in gradually and that the potential yield is uncertain. we would tie the yield on the wealth tax to our proposals to lower employers national insurance (see below); to the extent that revenues from the wealth tax grow, employers national insurance will be reduced.50for the common good: green party general election manifesto 2015 get serious about collecting tax. we would steadily increase staff in hmrc by 15,000 per annum over the parliament, in particular reopening local offices. this would cost successively an additional 1 billion each year and is estimated to bring in cumulatively each year an additional 6 billion, still only one-quarter closing the tax gap, and collecting an extra 30 billion a year by the end of the parliament. introduce an urgent programme of legislation, starting with a tax dodging bill designed to reduce the tax gap and establish a general anti-avoidance principle. our plans include obliging banks to provide information about companies automatically to hmrc, and abolishing the rule that allows non-domiciled residents not to pay tax on foreign income. consider making the 2 billion industry of designing, promoting and selling tax avoidance schemes illegal. introduce a robin hood tax of 0.1% on transactions in bonds and equities and 0.01% on derivatives, replacing the existing stamp duty on share transactions. this would raise up to 20 billion a year later in the parliament and would help stabilise financial markets. reform council tax by asking people in bigger homes to pay more and those in smaller ones less, and adding two additional bands at the top for the biggest homes worth more than around 2 million and 4.5 million. under these proposals two-thirds of people would pay less, with the more substantial increases for those in homes worth more than 1 million. overall this would be revenue neutral. make preparations to replace both council tax and the uniform business rate by a system of land value tax, where the level of taxation depends on the rental value of the land concerned. the rates would be decided locally with no caps, and subject to a degree of equalisation between richer and poorer areas, and would be kept and spent locally. transition to land value tax could begin by the last year of the parliament, and then extend over the following 10 years. further details are in the land value tax box. abolish the employees national insurance upper threshold. this would raise 28 billion a year in a full year from those on higher incomes above 42,380, but we would phase this increase in, with the first half of it in 201617. raise the additional (top) rate of income tax to 60%. this will help bring down the maximum salary ratio in any workplace from the best paid to the lowest paid to no more than 10:1 and also act as a disincentive to paying excessive salaries. it would raise approximately 2 billion a year. not allow corporation tax relief on any part of a salary that exceeds the maximum allowed by the 10:1 ratio in that company, to make it harder for companies to pay excessive salaries. increase corporation tax from 20% to 30%, yielding around 12 billion a year in a full year. small firms would remain on 20%. abolish the capital gains tax personal allowance, raising around 3.8 billion a year. fundamentally reform inheritance tax and turn it into an accessions tax. at present, inheritance tax is one of the easiest taxes to both avoid and evade, and the very rich usually find ways of paying very little. we would make the level of the tax depend on the wealth of the recipient, not the donor, so that all bequests to individual recipients who have less than 200,000 would be tax free. this would encourage people to spread their wealth more widely. counter avoidance by abolishing the seven-year rule and making all gifts by living donors subject to a similar accessions tax, with exemptions for small annual amounts as at present. in addition we would tighten up the tax treatment of certain trusts widely used for inheritance tax purposes.a wealth taxmost of the emphasis on inequality is about inequality of income. but there is even more inequality in the ownership of accumulated wealth  property, pension rights, stocks and shares, and other assets. the top 10% of households hold nearly half the uks wealth, the top 1% hold at least 12.5%. many other countries  france, switzerland, the netherlands, spain and norway for example  levy annual wealth taxes of up to 2%. the green party is part of a movement to build a global wealth tax, the only sure way to counter avoidance and evasion of such taxes. the introduction of automatic information exchange for income tax purposes from 2016 from tax havens will make it easier to trace hidden wealth. we would introduce a tax of 2% a year on the 1% of the population whose wealth exceeds 3 million. there will be an exemption for farmers with agricultural land worth less than 10 million. for those with little income and a rather illiquid asset such as a house, arrangements could be made to defer the tax until the sale of the house. in a full year this tax could raise 25 billion.for the common good: green party general election manifesto 2015 51to tax for sustainability we would commit the uk economy to a long-run plan to reduce the use of natural resources through the introduction of resource and pollution taxation. in particular we would: begin a major ecological shift in the taxation of companies by removing disincentives to employ people. specifically we would reduce employers national insurance contributions by the same amount as the yield from the wealth tax above. in the long run this will remove 25 billion a year from a tax on jobs, enabling the tax to be reduced from 13.8% of pay toaround 8%. reintroduce the fuel duty escalator, raising 2.2 billion in 2015 and an additional 2.2 billion in each successive year through the parliament. put aviation on a level playing field with other modes of transport by making it subject to fuel duty and vat, raising 16 billion in a full year. if outdated international law makes this impossible, introduce a flight tax dependent on distance and aircraft type that has the same overall economic effect. reduce vat on housing renovation and repair work (including insulation) to 5%, costing 1.6 billion a year. at present there is no vat on constructing new dwellings but vat at 20% on converting and renovating old buildings to be used as homes. reduce vat on the tourism industry (meals and drinks out, accommodation and also live performances) to 5%, putting the uk on a level playing field with our international competitors and costing around 6 billion a year. tax plastic bags and unnecessary packaging, raising perhaps 1 billion by 2020. levy eco-taxes on non-renewables or pollutants, in particular pesticides, organo-chlorines, nitrogen and artificial fertilisersand phosphates, raising 1 billion by 2020. introduce new taxes on the use of water by businesses and on waste heat from power stations, raising 3 billion by 2020. increase alcohol and tobacco duties by a successive 1.4 billion every year in the parliament.land value taxland value tax is a system of local taxation where the landowner pays a proportion of the rental value of the land itself, but not of buildings or improvements upon it, in tax each year. it has many advantages: it taxes the value of land and rents, which derive from nature and the efforts of the wider community and not from any effort by the landowner, rather than taxing wages and profits, which derive from labour and capital; it is hard to avoid because land cannot be hidden or moved; it dampens speculation in land and land hoarding; it favours tenants in particular, since the tax cannot be passed on from the landowner, and would substitute for council tax, which tenants have to pay; and it discourages landowners from not using derelict or vacant land.the land would be valued at the value that could be obtained if sold for the current planning permitted use. commons, urban open space, some nature reserves and land used in common such as roads would be exempt. the rate would be set by the local authority. special arrangements would allow those with land but a low income to pay their land value tax upon the sale of their land or upon their death.a land value tax set at around 2% of total land values would raise about the same amount as council tax and uniform business rate combined. moreover, 83% of properties would attract lower bills for land value tax than for council tax (and many of these would be paid by the freeholder rather than the tenant).joining up the policiesso what does taxation have to do with equality and sustainability? it can be used to promote both, rather than promote things we dont want. its folly to give capital allowances to investment in coal-fired generation, or vat concessions to new buildings rather than reusing old ones. its unjust to spend billions on tax relief on pension contributions used overwhelmingly by the rich, or not to use inheritance tax to encourage people to spread their wealth. taxation is not just a matter of getting in the money for the common good; we can use it to shape behaviour.its another virtuous circle.52 for the common good: green party general election manifesto 2015imagine a tax and benefit system so simple that we could all depend on a small basic income depending on our age, and then, when we did paid work, we simply got taxed at a higher rate the more we earned...introduction  what we have nowin the world of the current government, social security means exactly the opposite of what it says on the tin. living on benefits is to experience constant insecurity, wondering if payments will stretch to cover todays food, next weeks school bus, next months electricity bill. its to experience discrimination, as society is divided into strivers and scroungers, the deserving and the undeserving poor, taxpayers and those on benefits. its to be subject to delayed payments and sanctions, which push you to the food banks. its to lose up to four weeks payments simply for missing an interview.worst of all, the benefits system takes no account of peoples real lives. you can pay more in transport costs to attend compulsory sessions at the job centre than you receive in benefits. all the while, more and more people fall through the cracks in a social security system that, thanks to ideology and incompetence, offers no security.being on benefits creates a poverty trap that discourages employment or increased hours of work. yet work in todays uk doesnt pay either. its why, for the first time, there are more people living below the poverty line in working families (6.7 million) than in workless and retired families combined (6.3 million). its why one of modern uks growth industries is payday loan sharking. and its one of the reasons why nothing short of a green revolution in how we think about social security will do.the coalition government has introduced more work-for-benefits schemes, tougher rules on claiming benefits and more sanctions. job centre staff are encouraged to do whatever it takes to get people off the dole and deny them the money to which they are entitled. employment and support allowance is a disgrace, with harsh, inaccurate fitness-for-work assessments that are frequently overturned on appeal. claimants suffer because of huge delays in assessment of personal independence payments.the coalitions flagship policy, a so-called simplification of the system, universal credit, is a disaster waiting to happen. implementation dates are constantly revised and the computer systems are never quite ready.although universal credit claims to improve incentives to work, if you earn an extra 100, 65 will be deducted from your benefit. this is higher than the 45% tax charged on incomes over 150,000, yet we are told that, if we increase that top rate, high earners will lack incentives to work or will leave the country. so should we be surprised if many on benefits decide not to work? in a sensible world, wed have much lower deductions from earnings for those who earn least.for the common good: green party general election manifesto 2015 53chapter 10putting the social back into security: a plan to reform the taxand benefits systeminstead of entrenching the difference between being in and out of work, which is what mainstream welfare tries to do, the green party will work to eliminate it altogether.green mp caroline lucas and welfare reformin the last parliament, green mp caroline lucas took a stand against the removal of the link between benefit levels and inflation, the governments welfare reforms, the widespread scapegoating of the poor and disabled, and the myth that welfare and other public spending was the cause of the economic recession. here are some of her comments:as well as being callous and cruel, the bedroom tax is counter-productive.if our priority is fairness, we should be seeking savings from those who can afford it, not penalising the poorest and pushing them into ever more precarious misery.the governments misguided austerity programme is leading to social devastation and is economically illiterate.a radical long-term plan to reform the tax and benefits systemthe green party thinks the time has come to reconsider the whole tax and benefits system and to rebuild it from the groundup  a system not built on punishing and isolating people, making them jump through hoops to get hand-outs from the state, but one that goes back to the founding principles of the welfare state, in the belief that, as members of society, we have a shared responsibility for one anothers well-being in times of need and a shared commitment to helping others play the most active role they can in our society.the idea in a nutshell is this. scrap most of the existing benefits apart from disability benefits and housing benefit. abolish the income tax personal allowance. then pay every woman, man and child legally resident in the uk a guaranteed, non-means-tested income, sufficient to cover basic needs  a basic income. for those who earn, the basic income compensates for the loss of the personal allowance.children will receive a reduced basic income, child benefit. pensioners will receive their basic income at a higher level, as a citizens pension.the advantages are many and we support the principle of a universal basic income because it has the potential to: act as a springboard rather than a safety net; people can take jobs without fear of prosecution for working while on benefits; prevent people falling into absolute poverty rather than trying to help them when they are already there; reward people for all the work thats done outside the formal economy, and most of this work is done by women; encourage more of this unpaid activity, much of which  such as food growing, fixing things that have gone wrong, converting older buildings, protecting the natural environment  is a vital part of a transition to a more sustainable economy; avoid the poverty trap in which an increase in wages leads to a massive loss of benefits; make everyone who earns, however little, a citizen who contributes to society by paying taxes, giving almost everyone astake  raising the personal allowance takes us in precisely the wrong direction; be simple to administer and easy to understand.basic income would be a massive change to the entire uk tax and benefits system. we recognise that it would not be practicable or right to carry out that change within a single parliament. we are publishing alongside but separate from this manifesto a detailed set of proposals for a comprehensive basic income scheme. it contains full details of the scheme itself, costings and proposals on how to pay for it, and an initial analysis of how the scheme would affect the net income of different groups.we would use the forthcoming parliament to consult upon this scheme, have government departments carry out and commission research (including research into behavioural changes and how basic income would affect those on the lowest incomes and child poverty), and draft appropriate legislation, with a view to implementing the full scheme in the following parliament.54 for the common good: green party general election manifesto 2015there are further things we would propose to do in the forthcoming parliament as steps towards this major reform: reform the existing working-age benefits regime. pay an enhanced child benefit. introduce a universal citizens pension.working-age benefitsa major problem with existing working-age benefits and tax credits is the poverty trap. we would be prepared to invest up to 30 billion over the parliament to reduce the amounts that people lose from their benefits when they move into paid work and to fund the other changes to the benefits regime set out in this section.in complex ways, eligibility for some benefits (e.g. jobseekers allowance) is lost altogether once a person is employed for a certain period, or reduced pound for pound if certain small disregarded amounts are exceeded. some other benefits (e.g. housing benefit) are reduced in a different way, by withdrawal rates that allow those earning to keep a small part of what they earn and not lose all of it. we would make small changes in the direction of allowing those who earn some income from paid work tokeep more of that income, starting with increasing the disregards for income support and jobseekers allowance (jsa). initially we would increase the income disregarded on jsa for all categories of client to 50 a week, with similar increases for those on universal credit.it is not possible to be precise about how much the increased costs of such moves would be offset by more people on benefits taking up employment or working for longer hours. depending on results, we are prepared to invest up to 30 billion on such employment-stimulating measures over the parliament. we would also explore the introduction of a more generous treatment of earnings within universal credit for all claimants, whatever their housing circumstances.we would also: halt implementation of the universal credit programme and carry out a thorough review of its structure and implementation, including the treatment of earned income, and removing conditionality. end work-for-benefits programmes, or workfare, and ensure a fair choice of waged work opportunities or voluntary training for jobseekers. ensure that all those on training or work placements as part of the benefits regime are either in college-based training or at work earning at least the minimum wage. review the harsh systems of sanctions and benefits caps introduced by the coalition government and its predecessors. consider offering more personalised job-seeking support for people with mental health problems. restore council tax benefit at the equivalent of 201213 levels for low-income householders, costing around 500 million a year. cancel the department for work and pensions contracts with the private sector for benefit entitlement assessment. restore the link between state benefits and earnings; ensure state benefits rise as fast as prices or wages, whichever ofthose grows more. abolish childcare tax credits and tax reliefs in the light of our proposals for free universal early education and childcare. pay students maintenance grants until basic income is introduced. raise the minimum wage and outlaw exploitative zero-hours contracts, so that the jobs taken by unemployed people are above a minimum standard.for the common good: green party general election manifesto 2015 55child benefitbringing up a child is expensive. it is also vital work on behalf of society as a whole; those of us without children will depend on the children of others when we grow older. it is right that society as a whole makes a contribution, as is recognised by our free state education system. but that system needs two extensions: a free universal early education and childcare service (see chapter 7 on education), and a more realistic level of child benefit.we will: raise child benefit as from 2016 from 20.70 a week for the oldest or only child and 13.70 a week for additional children in201516 to 40 a week for each child. pay for the 15.5 billion net cost of this by using this much of the 28 billion raised from those on higher incomes byabolishing the national insurance upper threshold.citizens pensionthe bedrock of our pension policy is the citizens pension, which, unlike the new flat-rate pension, would be paid to all pensioners regardless of contribution record, and to existing as well as new pensioners, so no pensioner will live in poverty. we would introduce this in 2016. it will pay 180 a week to a single pensioner or 310 for a couple, taking all pensioners above the poverty line. increases will be at the higher of the increases in the prices of basic goods and services or in average earnings.the existing state pension and pension credits cost 90 billion a year, while the new pensions above will cost 116 billion. the net cost is therefore 26 billion. we will fund this by reducing tax and national insurance incentives for private pensions by one- half, raising 20 billion (see the older people and pensions section in chapter 5) and using a further 6 billion available from abolishing the national insurance upper threshold (see the child benefit section above).joining up the policiesso what do housing, pensions and investing in a new sustainable economy have to do with each other? pensions need sound, long-run infrastructure to invest in, such as energy generation and social housing. and, if the pensions system is broken, people will invest in houses instead, pushing up prices and rents. so, if we create a new pensions system investing in the things we need, and discourage the things such as mortgage interest relief for landlords that encourage investment in housing, then we reduce the money chasing existing housing, and prices and rents fall.its another virtuous circle.56 for the common good: green party general election manifesto 2015imagine being part of another kind of coalition. not the grubby one thats handed democracy over tothe private sector, but one made up of elected politicians determined to govern for the common good, a revitalised local government, a regulated private sector, the third sector and non-profits  and you and me. imagine a voting system in which your vote actually counts. imagine more decisions being taken where they really matter  locally. imagine going to your reopened public library, strolling round your well-tended local park, taking your child to a school brought back under local authority control, and visiting an elderly relative in a local authority care home staffed by trained and well-paid carers. imagine the end of cronyism, corruption and the westminster bubble. imagine parliament belonging to the people...who governs?we elect politicians to govern in our name, not to hand power over to huge corporations acting in shareholder interest.successive governments, and particularly the current one, have outsourced government to the unaccountable private sector. this hollowing out of government is based on dogma  that the private sector does things better than the public sector. successive scandals and failures of provision have proved this dogma wrong. but still the contracts get handed out, with the private sector taking all the profit and the taxpayer  you and me  shouldering all the risk. government has been put out to tender. corporate interests, heading a coalition of the rich and powerful, have ruled the roost for too long.this has brought politics and politicians into disrepute. when things go wrong, the government blames the companies to which it has outsourced its work, and politicians are accused of being on the make. some are, as we found out during the expenses scandal. but many arent, and the green party will lead a revolution in standards, putting politics back in the hands of the people and governing for the common good.it is well placed to do this. the green party has made electoral gains at local, national and european level. our councillors, our mp and our meps work effectively for the people who voted for them.the biggest lesson of the scottish referendum was that, when people are given the responsibility for making big decisions, they grab it with both hands. the green party will turn the tide on apathy and disillusionment by making these opportunities the rule rather than the exception.a green government would: regulate the private sector in the common interest, including curbing excessive pay for executives and senior managers. introduce a public service users bill to bring back into public ownership sectors of the economy on which we all depend. recognise that, if government is small, society doesnt automatically become big  the third sector needs strong, enabling government. treat citizens as grown-ups, capable of recognising the common good and acting on it.for the common good: green party general election manifesto 2015 57chapter 11government and people, public and private,local and national not accept the dogma that government cannot lead or innovate and has no entrepreneurial drive. we will set creative government free. recognise that efficiency in public services does matter, provided it is not at the cost of poor service or exploitation of staff. we would expect to find very modest savings of 0.3% over 50% of the governments operations each successive year. in contrast, the coalition has too often described actual cuts in public services as efficiency savings.green mp caroline lucas and the public service users billin january 2014, inspired by we own it, green mp caroline lucas presented in parliament a plan to defend our public services. her public service users bill would: make public ownership the default option before any service is sold off. ensure people are asked  and genuinely listened to  before any service is put out to tender. give the public a right to recall private companies if theyre running our services poorly. make private companies running public services more transparent.a new constitutional settlementuk politics is rooted in the past and has lost touch with the present. our parliament looks back to feudal times rather than forward to democratic times; we cling to 18 as the age of political maturity despite young peoples growing sophistication and capacity to make decisions for themselves; we legitimise corruption through unfair funding of political parties; our mps pay more attention to their parties than to the people when it comes to voting  constituents need to be re-empowered.to put this right the green party will: move towards a written constitution with a bill of rights. bring in proportional representation (pr) using the additional member system for parliamentary elections and continue fixed- term parliaments. only the 200,000 votes in marginal seats really counted in the last election  thats less than 0.5% of those eligible to vote. we would make everyones vote count. introduce the right to vote at 16. reform the house of lords to become a fully elected body chosen by pr; but, to promote its independence, members shouldbe elected for only one fixed term of ten years, with half the house being elected every five years. bring in a fair system of state funding for political parties so theres no longer a need for reliance on private and trade union donations, which can have a corrupting effect. ensure that all lobbying, and in particular corporate lobbying, is registered and fully disclosed, including lobbying of elected politicians and of civil servants. immediately repeal the unsatisfactory lobbying act, so that civil society organisations can campaign properly. retain the principle that human rights are the common property of the whole world by keeping the human rights act andretaining the uks membership of the european convention on human rights and the council of europe. aspire to a 50:50 parliament by 2025 with equal numbers of women and men. introduce referendums on local government decisions if called for by 20% of the local electorate. introduce recall referendums on mps and other representatives if 20% of electors request it. make equality before the law a fundamental constitutional right. but this is only a reality if all can afford to use the law. we would restore the cuts to legal aid, costing around 700 million a year.58for the common good: green party general election manifesto 2015localisationthe scotland independence referendum put decentralisation back on the political agenda  a cause that greens have championed for years. we have long argued that nothing should be decided at a central level that can be decided at a local level. we need to improve the way the uk is governed, passing power back to the people, back to where they live and work. local councils have been starved of the funds they need to do their job. that is why requests for social care go unheeded, libraries are shut and public parks neglected.and it isnt just money. local democracy is withering and dying because councillors are hemmed about by regulation and their functions have been systematically removed over the past 30 years. local government secretary eric pickles has virtually abolished onshore wind energy by overriding local planning and halting turbine projects. we will fund local government properly and extend its functions, reviving local democracy.we will:money provide a 10 billion a year uplift in local authority budgets to allow local authorities to restore essential local services, creating more than 200,000 local jobs. add further higher bands to council tax to allow authorities to raise more on the largest homes. not cap what local authorities are allowed to raise in council tax, allow local councils to conduct revaluations and to set theirown multiplier rates, provided they are more progressive, and not require a council tax referendum when they do so. ensure that grant funding is sufficient to pay for all statutory services that councils are required to provide. to fund discretionary activities, we would allow local authorities to set local business rates, and then distribute the whole of council tax receipts and business rate receipts between local authorities on a basis decided by a commission independent of central government set up by local authorities themselves. also allow local authorities to levy new local taxes, such as local tourist taxes, empty homes levies, supermarket taxes or workplace parking levies, and to set rates for and keep part or all of some taxes collected locally, such as income tax and vat, and distribute them as above. allow local authorities freedom to set local fines, fees and charges. put these taxation arrangements beyond future whitehall revision by giving formal constitutional protection to localdemocracy and tax-raising powers. scrap the new homes bonus and add the money to the revenue support grant. not start any new private finance initiative projects and set local authorities free to borrow to fund local capital investment in social housing, electricity generation and distribution, and local public transport. set up a fund of up to 5 billion over the parliament to buy out existing pfi projects where it is a good deal to do so. democracy restore local authority control over education, with full delegation of the appropriate budgets. allow local authorities to run local public transport and other local services such as domestic and commercial waste disposal, community energy schemes and local food production entirely as they wish, including using publicly owned and run services and employing social enterprise and voluntary sector organisations. keep trade local by allowing local authorities to favour local procurement to help their local economy. give local authorities powers to encourage local live performance in the arts by moving funding from the regional to the locallevel and modifying regulations so that small-scale live performance in pubs and similar venues is not stifled. create an assembly for cornwall, with similar powers to the welsh assembly. work for the abolition of the city of london corporation and the special statuses it enjoys. residents will decide on the future governance arrangements for the local functions exercised by the corporation, with the same division of roles between the local and the strategic as in any other part of london.for the common good: green party general election manifesto 2015 59planning require local authorities to set out a local carbon plan showing how their area will meet overall greenhouse gas reduction targets. put planning back in the hands of local government by: repealing the national planning policy framework and in particular its presumption in favour of economic development; restricting the ability of the secretary of state to call in planning applications; restricting the right of applicants to appeal only where there has been an error in the planning process; strengthening local authorities powers to prevent changes of use for important community facilities such as local shops, pubs and meeting halls; giving local authorities planning powers to support local shops and businesses through planning policies including business conservation areas, ensuring basic shops are available within walking distance in all urban areas, restricting the number of payday lenders and restricting the power of supermarkets; and introducing a community right of appeal where a development is non-compliant with a neighbourhood plan or local plan. support preservation of the historic environment, in part by being flexible about how older buildings reduce their energy use.constitutional conventionthe green party supports calls for a constitutional convention led by citizens  a peoples convention. wed use that opportunity to make the case for the changes detailed above. parts of england, based on groups of local authorities, could come togetherto exercise greater powers; these might amount to existing regions, or possibly city regions. the process must be driven by the bottom up decisions of local authorities, not by top down direction. the convention would also consider further devolution to scotland, northern ireland and wales. as set out above, we favour much greater devolution to and tax-raising powers for local authorities, with this settlement put beyond future whitehall revision by giving formal constitutional protection to local democracy. any constitutional changes should be subject to referendums.walesgreens have long supported the process of devolution in wales. we believe that the people of wales should enjoy the degree of autonomy, perhaps including full self-government or independence, that they wish to have, as expressed in a referendum.up until any such referendum, greens in wales will focus on improving and maximising the potential of the current devolution settlement.reflecting the devolved status of wales within the uk, the wales green party has an autonomous status within the wider party and publishes independent policy statements and its own manifesto covering all areas of devolved power. these include matters such as health, education, transport and housing.greens in wales would: increase real power at all levels, from local councils up to the welsh assembly. increase the number of assembly members. push for the national assembly to become a parliament with powers equal to those in scotland.one benefit of these increased powers would be the ability for wales to fully realise its potential as a producer of clean renewable energy.greens recognise that cultural diversity is as vital as ecological biodiversity in maintaining and enriching a healthy and fair society. we would promote and protect this cultural diversity at a grassroots level with the promotion of community radio, television, live arts, etc. in both the welsh and english languages. wales green party policies would help create the strong local sustainable economies and thriving communities necessary for the future of the welsh language and the nations rich cultural diversity.60 for the common good: green party general election manifesto 2015information and digital rightswe live in the information age and we know that information is power. but how should information be controlled? what information should be available, and to whom?the green party supports a world of open, freely flowing information. we dont want disproportionate or unaccountable surveillance or censorship. we want a transparent state, but we want control over the data that our digital lives create. we need copyright laws that reward creators but that are consistent with digital technologies. above all we want democratic political control of this technology. we would consider combining elements of the policies below into a comprehensive digital billof rights.we would: oppose any case for secret unaccountable mass surveillance of the type exposed by edward snowden. we do accept that government law enforcement agencies may occasionally need to intercept communications in specific circumstances. such specific surveillance should be proportionate, necessary, effective and within the rule of law, with independent judicial approval and genuine parliamentary oversight. replace the regulation of investigatory powers act 2000, which has failed to regulate the deployment of undercover police; to support the confidentiality of journalistic sources; to support legal confidentiality; and to enshrine an open and effective right of redress. support and protect internet freedom. follow human rights judgments limiting surveillance and data retention in full. support the eus proposals to strengthen data protection laws against opposition from large us data-driven companies. limit the censoring or takedown of content or activity to exceptional circumstances, clearly set out within a comprehensive legal framework. make copyright shorter in length, fair and flexible, and prevent patents applying to software. introduce a more satisfactory law on so-called malicious comments made on social media than the blanket and crudesection 127 of the communications act 2003. oppose the privatisation of data held by the government that should be open to all, such as the postcode address file, or by companies providing public services, such as data on the progress of buses that can be used by smartphone apps to predict waiting times. oppose the sale of personal data, such as health or tax records, for commercial or other ends. use government purchasing power to support open standards in information technology.media, sports and the artshow politics is reported is vital for our democracy  active citizenship has to be informed citizenship. public support for the arts is part of a civilised society. we would: tighten the rules on cross-media ownership and ensure that no individual or company owns more than 20% of a media market. support the recommendations of the leveson inquiry into press ethics and for the cross-party royal charter. but if this is not supported by all the major newspapers we will support legislation to implement the leveson system of independent press self-regulation. maintain the bbc as the primary public service broadcaster, free of government interference, with funding guaranteed in real terms in statute to prevent government interference. increase government arts funding by 500 million a year to restore the cuts made since 2010 and reinstate proper levels of funding for local authorities, helping to keep local museums, theatres, libraries and art galleries open. reduce vat to 5% for live performances. work to support fair pay productions in the arts. support initiatives to make the arts and sports accessible to all. set targets for participation in sports by women, ethnic minorities and disabled people in particular.for the common good: green party general election manifesto 2015 61 make sure all children get at least a half-day equivalent of sports in school and encourage both the use of schools sports facilities by the community and participation in regional and national sporting events by our young people. ensure that all have digital access and give bt and other public telecommunications operators an obligation to provide affordable high-speed broadband-capable infrastructure to every household and small business. this in particular will encourage video-conferencing, helping to reduce both business and family travel. strengthen controls on advertising directed at children. value the contribution made by civil society organisations both here and abroad. in particular, we would repeal the lobbyingact 2014 (see the green mp opposes the lobbying bill box below). support state funding of political parties. give fair representation to political parties in televised debates.caroline lucas opposes the lobbying billat every stage of the lobbying bills progress through parliament, green mp caroline lucas was at the forefront of attempts to stop the bill becoming law. she was one of a group of mps who tabled an amendment to reject the bill outright and was a vocal critic of moves to drastically curtail the debate we need for a healthy democracy.caroline campaigned for legislation that would shine a real light on lobbying activity and criticised the coalitions proposals for letting most corporate lobbyists off the hook, at the same time as effectively gagging the activities of civil society groups speaking out on anything from housing policy to wildlife conservation.she tabled an amendment to the bill that would have opened up to proper scrutiny how much is spent on lobbying  as well as who is doing it. she called for details to be made public about when staff transfer between the civil service and the private sector. and she has stood up in parliament time and again to reiterate the green partys commitment to repealing whats dubbed the gagging bill.62for the common good: green party general election manifesto 2015imagine being able to leave your car in the garage  or not needing one at all... because reliable, affordable public transport, coupled with safe, clean, welcoming streets for walking and cycling, meets your transport needs. could that not be the real world?like so much else, the uk has got transport upside down. the big picture is a world of finite resources, especially the type that runs much of our transport  petroleum. this is running out, and we know we need to leave much of what is left in the ground. we have to create a transport system based on sustainable alternatives.we also have an increasingly car-dependent population because the cost of public transport has risen faster than wages and faster than the total cost of driving, and in many areas public transport is so scarce that people have little alternative but toget around by car. this has led to a public health crisis caused by rising levels of physical inactivity and health-damaging air pollution. we also face an increasing toll of death and injury on the roads, particularly among pedestrians and cyclists who face unacceptable danger in our vehicle-dominated and congested towns, cities and villages.our privatised railways are fragmented and uncoordinated, ticket prices are high and unpredictable, and timetables do not connect seamlessly with buses at stations. this means rail fails to play its full part in delivering an effective alternative to the private car.long-distance travel by air is one of the most energy-intensive and polluting forms of transport and causes health-damaging local pollution near airports. aviation fuel goes untaxed and there is no vat on tickets, amounting to a 16 billion a year subsidy in the uk. we need a shift in priority, removing subsidies from air travel to invest in public transport that supports the common good.in the long run we have to create a transport system that is socially just and addresses health inequality by prioritising affordable access to services by walking, cycling and public transport, by reducing road danger, by cleaning up our air and by minimising congestion. this transport system should use electricity, not oil, and make our towns, cities and villages into more liveable, socially inclusive places.against this backdrop, mainstream transport policy, which urges us to travel further and faster than ever before, is senseless, yet this is what all parties except the green party offer you.the key to getting this right is to manage demand rather than increase it; that is, to reduce the need to travel in the first place. we need to: reduce the distances travelled, reduce the number of journeys made by car and switch as many journeys as possible to walking, cycling and public transport; encourage alternatives to travel, such as video-conferencing; integrate different transport options and provide seamless doorto-door journeys; prioritise everyday access for everybody wherever they live to local facilities such as the shops, the doctors surgery, schools and workplaces; and enable more people to get to where they need to go while using a car less.for the common good: green party general election manifesto 2015 63chapter 12getting around: transportgreen party transport policy prioritises in this order, building from the bottom up: walking and disabled access to all other forms of transport; cycling; public transport (trains, light rail/trams, buses and ferries) and rail- and water-borne freight; light goods vehicles, taxis and low-powered motor cycles; private motorised transport (cars and high-powered motor cycles); heavy goods vehicles; and aircraft.bringing the railways into public handsfor trains to play their part in the total journey experience, they need to connect seamlessly with buses and convenient walking and cycling routes to local centres of habitation.the green party is committed to bringing rail services into public ownership and control. the current fragmented structure does not put the passenger and the total journey experience at the centre of planning and has created a costly, wasteful, uncoordinated outcome. recent experience in running the east coast main line within the public sector has shown that both quality and receipts to the treasury go up when a rail service is run in this way, whereas experience on the west coast main line in the privatesector shows that the franchise system is costly, wasteful and not fit for purpose. the green party will consult widely on the organisational details of a rail operation in public ownership and how it will link to democratic accountability at the regional and city-region geographical scales.diesel exhaust emissions are a known human carcinogen and diesel trains do not perform as well as electrified rail operations in terms of passenger comfort, acceleration and deceleration, and the ability to make more stops at intermediate stations with minimal impact on overall journey time. the green party wants to see electrification of the railway system to achieve levels to be found in germany (59% of track electrified) or sweden (73% electrified). the uk has 34% of its track electrified. high levels of electrification reduce health-damaging air pollution, reduce greenhouse gases and deliver a much-improved passenger experience. electrification will also require new rolling stock and the green party will promote the design and manufacturing of this new stock in the uk, contributing to job creation in those regions with higher than average unemployment.putting this plan into action for the common good means bringing the railways back into public ownership  making them belong to you and me, run by rail workers for passengers. on 26 june 2013, green mp caroline lucas published a private members bill to do just this, a policy supported by 66% of the british public. the privatised railways cost over 1 billion a year in: interest payments; debt write-offs; the costs of railway fragmentation; the profit margins of tiers of contractors and sub-contractors; payments to shareholders; and bonuses paid to railway bosses (up to 166% of annual salaries).green councillors mean safer streets...green councillors were instrumental in bringing in 20 mph limits on many residential roads in norwich, islington and leicester, as well as a default 20 mph limit on all residential roads in lancashire and in brighton & hove.64for the common good: green party general election manifesto 2015between 1997 and 2013, rail fares leapt by 22%, while road users have experienced a 9% drop  exactly the wrong priority. rail isnt really private anyway  60% of the network is owned by state-backed foreign companies. and this private system takes 4 billion in public subsidies every year. labours response is to require the state to bid for franchises it already owns  at millions of pounds a time. as caroline says, a privatised railway is a blatant transfer of public money to private interests at the expense of the taxpayer and rail passengers. bringing the railways back into public ownership would cost very little if it was done as existing franchises fell due for renewal. this will: save money; mean a better deal for passengers; allow local authorities to plan and run local services; increase the scope for the democratic involvement of local communities in planning and running railways; and reduce congestion and improve safety.in addition on the railways, we would not support hs2 (the proposed high-speed network). the money to be spent on this hugely expensive project, which at best will reduce journey times for a few passengers, would be much better spent on improving the conventional rail connections between various major cities, improving the resilience of the existing network to climate change and reopening lines and stations that have been closed.decarbonising transportthe major challenge for our transport system is to decarbonise it and end its reliance on fossil fuels. we would: end the wasteful and destructive national major roads programme, saving 15 billion over the parliament. spend part of this 15 billion on improving and subsidising public transport, with an average fare reduction of 10% costing 8 billion over the parliament, fixing potholes in existing roads and investing in walking and cycling. support walking and cycling. in particular, we would ensure that pedestrians and cyclists get their fare share of road space and would spend at least 30 per head on them over every year of the parliament. funding should be allocated flexibly to make safe, convenient routes that address the needs of pedestrians and cyclists while reducing any risk of conflict between them. support the re-regulation of bus services to provide a better, more reliable service. end the favourable tax treatment of aviation and have a separate target for aviation emissions of below 37.5 million tonnesco2 equivalent a year. stop airport expansion, in particular no new runways at either heathrow or gatwick, and ban night flying. invest in electric vehicle charging points for buses and taxis, and for cars where there are gaps in the network of public and community transport. incentivise consolidation of white van deliveries so that last-mile deliveries can be made by cargo bikes and electric vehicles in local areas.affordable public transportinstead of prestige projects such hs2 and new runways, we need to prioritise local transport and make sure it is accessible to everybody. the green party would: prioritise affordable local public transport, accessible to all, including those with disabilities. support free local transport for pensioners, including the existing local bus pass scheme and the freedom pass in london. extend free local public transport to young people and students, costing around 4 billion a year. develop regional smart payment systems with integrated ticketing, like the london oyster system. extend networks of public transport to include rural areas.for the common good: green party general election manifesto 2015 65a step change in road safetythe numbers of people killed or seriously injured on the uks roads have fallen in recent years. but they are still appallingly high: 1,713 people died on the roads in 2013, and 21,657 were seriously injured, far worse than for other modes of transport. we will: work for a road transport system that results in zero deaths or serious injuries by systematically reducing sources of danger on the roads. reduce both collisions and fuel use by bringing down speed limits, in particular to 20 mph in residential areas, including main roads where people live, work and shop; enforce speed limits with speed cameras and policing. change the culture of road justice and civil compensation with a road danger reduction approach. a greater duty of care should be expected of drivers in reducing injury and intimidation of vulnerable road users. motor vehicle drivers should be presumed liable for injuries to pedestrians and cyclists. if the casualty has contributed to the collision, compensation may be reduced, but not when the victim is a child, elderly (70+) or impaired. reduce the alcohol limit for drivers to as close to zero as is practicable. require newly manufactured lorries to be equipped with best practice technology to make sure that drivers are fully aware of the presence of all pedestrians and cyclists. pedestrian and cyclist fatalities and serious injuries when involved in collisions with lorries are predictable, preventable and unacceptable. the technology already exists and is in use in several countries and consists of a mixture of in-cab screens linked to cameras, multiple wing mirrors and physical modification to prevent people being dragged under the vehicle. lorries already in use must be retro-fitted with the same equipment and lorries not so equipped will not be allowed into our towns and cities. reduce lorry activity and road freight volume by improving rail freight services, reducing the number of empty or partially loaded trips, and using cargo bikes for last-mile deliveries to replace some white van trips.towns and cities for peoplewe need to rescue our towns and cities from traffic and turn them back into places where we want to be. the green party will support an active travel bill for england in order to achieve this. make streets healthy and safe places for people to cycle and walk and for children to play, while building physical activity into their daily journeys. help schools and workplaces to support active travel to and from work, and encourage local authorities to assist this by linking their public health and transport functions. ensure that all planning decisions have to take into account the active travel and public transport implications. make public transport more convenient by integrating ticketing with smart regional ticketing systems such as the london introduce road-pricing schemes such as the london congestion charge and road-user tolls for heavy lorries. begin consultation with a view to developing a framework for the progressive elimination of diesel exhaust emissions. a major cause of air pollution is emissions from diesel vehicles (cars, buses and trains). we recognise the latest scientific evidence of the harmful effect of diesel on human health. introduce ultra low emission zones to ensure air pollution reduces to comply with eu limits. reduce the need for car parking spaces by reducing car dependency and transferring trips, where appropriate, to walking, cycling and public transport. car parking is expensive to provide, can obstruct pedestrians and people with disabilities if it takes place on pavements, and takes up valuable road space that could be reallocated to pedestrians and cyclists. reduce parking spaces in new developments and increase rates of walking, cycling and public transport by strengthening planning law to make best practice travel plans mandatory for workplaces, homes and other destinations. eliminate pavement parking and, in close cooperation with waste collection and emergency services, make sure that these essential services have unimpeded access to all addresses. ensure that parking policies in residential areas deliver a high-quality street environment and reduce the numbers of those who are clogging up residential streets as part of a commuter trip or other activities not related to a visit to an address in that street. parking charges of all kinds in public car parks and streets will be proportionate to the full cost of providingthat facility. provide cycle parking throughout towns and cities at locations where there is demand and invest in on-street secure cycle storage in residential streets.66for the common good: green party general election manifesto 2015oyster card.a rural transport revolutionapproximately 20% of the uk population live in rural areas and many of these are retired and may have to adjust to a lifestyle without a car for health and income reasons. it is essential that rural areas get the best possible deal for wideningtransport choices.the green party does not accept that there is a fundamental and intractable rural transport problem. rural transport in many parts of germany, austria and switzerland is of a very high quality and the quality is based on careful planning, coordinationand investment and recognition that, although a car will be needed for a proportion of journeys, it is not the default option. the small village of gempen in switzerland, with a population of about 800, has ten buses each day that connect with tram and train services at the next-larger settlement (dornach). we will: make sure that rural areas are not neglected when transport budgets and planning for our cities and city regions are under discussion. develop networks of community and public transport to provide regular links to onward transport networks. introduce speed limits of 20 mph in villages and 40 mph on rural roads.green councillors bring safer cycling...lancaster greens helped to deliver the cycling demonstration town project with more than 4 million external funding for safer routes and cycling promotion.greens in power carry out our transport policiesin green-led brighton, the council has: introduced the largest connected 20 mph zone in the country, and casualties fell by 19%; built a new cycle hub at the station; introduced cycle priority at junctions, proper cycle lanes and cycle contraflow lanes; introduced the first floating bus stop, resulting in: bus usage increasing by almost 9% over two years, falling nitrous oxide and carbon dioxide emissions, an 11% increase in daily cycle journeys between 2009 and 2012, and falling road casualties, with 200 fewer killed and injured in 2013 than in 2011.for the common good: green party general election manifesto 2015 67imagine the uk as a good global neighbour, committed to peacemaking and to helping create the conditions for a flourishing life for everyone on the planet. this is a uk bent on resolving conflicts rather than making them worse, determined to listen as well as to speak. how about the chance to vote for a europe of self- reliance rather than free trade and indiscriminate growth? imagine a climate change agreement that is both just and effective. picture a world where the big decisions are made by democratically elected governments and not by private corporations  picture the end of talk of the transatlantic trade and investment partnership (ttip)...we live in an interconnected world, which brings huge benefits as well as drawbacks. decisions that we make affect people in other countries, and events in other countries affect us. in particular, uk foreign and military policies over many years have contributed to challenges to our security today: by using up global resources or polluting the air or water that we all share; by influencing how much we pay for diminishing natural resources and how much we get paid for our labour; by driving displacement; by creating insecurity at home and abroad.greens are internationalists and want to live in a world that is just and fair, secure and peaceful, and where human rights are universally respected. we will make the uk a force for international good, respected throughout the global community, with coherent foreign policies based on building effective and cooperative security relations across the world.all countries deserve a voice in global decision-making, and we want to use ours to support the following: a new, holistic and consistent approach to peace and defence, which is focused on genuine peacekeeping and respect for the sovereignty of peoples around the world. a fundamental restructuring of our global economy, with power held at the local and regional level and only passed upwards when international cooperation is necessary. we call this subsidiarity  this principle is the basis of our approach to the european union and other international organisations. writing off and writing down unpayable international debt, avoiding paternalistic aid, and securing the rights of first nations peoples. trade that supports the well-being of workers that can be achieved without breaching sustainability limits is useful, but a blind commitment to free trade is not. a global policy of contraction and convergence in which rich countries use of finite energy resources contracts, while that of poorer countries expands, to converge on an equitable and sustainable per capita sharing of global energy, designed to keep within 2 degrees c of warming. only in this way can poor countries improve living standards while the world as a whole avoids hitting resource and climate limits. making uk foreign policy genuinely independent, based on the principles of shared responsibility, cooperative security and human rights.68for the common good: green party general election manifesto 2015chapter 13the local and global: international affairswe will: work to reform the united nations and associated bodies, to reflect better the needs and interests of all countries, and make the un more representative and effective through abolishing permanent seats on the un security council (unsc). seek negotiated settlements to a range of conflicts around the world and block sales of weapons and military equipment that increase misery and death for non-combatants and have particularly destructive impacts on vulnerable peoples, notably women and children. outlaw the use of torture, the sale of torture equipment and the rendition of people to countries where torture is not prohibited, and enforce the laws against it. take proportionate measures to protect against terrorism, ensuring that civil liberties are not undermined in the process, that communities are not scapegoated and that action reflects a genuine assessment of the threat to our security. we need targeted policing and security service activities, not mass surveillance, prisons that rehabilitate those convicted of terrorism offences and effective programmes to prevent radicalisation and to deradicalise individuals. uphold the principles of freedom of speech and peaceful protest, including support for vulnerable communities of all religious faiths and none.in relation to specific international challenges around election time: we opposed military interventions in afghanistan, libya and iraq, and will oppose all future interventions that lack a sufficient moral, legal and democratic mandate or when military action risks being counter-productive, for example by providing fertile recruitment, fundraising and propaganda opportunities. we will instead advocate for regional solutions to conflicts and for the uk to take a lead in advancing diplomatic, economic and political solutions to the threats posed by terrorist groups such as isis and boko haram. we would provide humanitarian support for the millions of refugees displaced by these conflicts. we seek a just, sustainable and peaceful solution to the arab-israeli conflict, based on mutual recognition of the rights to independent statehood for palestinians and israelis. we condemn human rights violations by both parties and the oppression and disproportionate use of aggression by the israeli government against the people of gaza. we seek to suspend the eu israel association agreement. we condemn state-sanctioned breaches of human rights by countries such as china, syria, sudan and pakistan, as well as by individuals or organisations, and we advocate the use of sanctions and legal action via the international criminal court for those violating international human rights standards. we would work to support a negotiated settlement between russia and ukraine, while developing a new security structure for the region involving the organization for security and co-operation in europe, with opposition to arms transfers and military interventions in regional and internal conflicts.international agreement on climate changea global climate disaster can be prevented only if the whole world works together. the green party will make it its main foreign policy priority to secure a major new international agreement, in particular at the un meeting in paris in december 2015, with a wide-ranging workable plan to arrest climate change and share global resources more evenly. the basis of this agreement should be contraction and convergence (c&c).c&c means: allowing countries that currently emit very little carbon dioxide to increase their emissions, using their energy resources to reduce poverty and improve their peoples well-being. requiring all other countries to reduce their emissions to a small per capita limit, fixed to be consistent with a global limit that keeps temperature rises below 2 degrees c. recognising the special responsibility of countries such as the uk that have become wealthy from 200 years of fossil-fuel- based industrialisation. some of this wealth will need to be shared with poorer countries that have left their fossil fuels in the ground and their forests still standing.in these ways, by an agreed date, every citizen of the world will have a fair and equal share of global emissions potential. being rich will no longer permit people to unfairly affect the whole worlds atmosphere and climate.for the common good: green party general election manifesto 2015 69security and defencethe uks recent history has been scarred by involvement in ill-advised military interventions that have undermined our national and international security. the green party opposed these interventions, which have brought havoc to iraq and libya and only fragile gains in afghanistan, as well as driving an increased terrorist threat closer to home  all at the cost of many precious lives and vast amounts of money and other resources that could have been better used for other needs.we will restructure and update the uks security and defence establishments and services so that they contribute to the international good. we will: pursue a policy of defensive defence, which threatens no one yet makes it clear that threats and attacks will be resisted. take a leading role in preventing violent conflict, genocide and war crimes overseas through (i) helping to develop local capacities to avoid, manage and resolve conflicts; and (ii) enhancing the uks well-respected role in genuine peacekeeping and the protection of non-combatant communities. develop policies and programmes for environmental defence and disaster mitigation and relief, drawing on the skills and activities of our current military forces and increasing gender representation and training to equip the uk to contribute more effectively in these kinds of human security emergencies. diminish dependence on arms sales through a halt to government subsidies and introducing a strict licensing regime to prevent sales of weapons and military equipment to undemocratic regimes and those that violate human rights (including, at the present time, israel and saudi arabia). look after veterans and their families.international disarmament and security agreementsthe green party will ensure that uk security and defence policies are consistent with international law, including international humanitarian law, and that the uk implements in good faith all relevant obligations in the following international treaties: the nuclear non-proliferation treaty, the outer space treaty, the biological weapons convention, the chemical weapons convention, the comprehensive nuclear-test-ban treaty, the mine ban treaty, the cluster munitions convention, the arms trade treaty, the un programme of action on small arms and light weapons, and the geneva protocols.we will: enhance uk cooperation with civil society and international agencies to implement relevant un security council resolutions, including unsc resolutions 1325, 1820 and 1889, dealing with the role of gender violence in war and the necessity to involve women at all levels in preventing war and building peace and security. save a massive 100 billion over the next 30 years by cancelling trident replacement and decommissioning existing nuclear forces and facilities. enhance international security and non-proliferation by initiating and/or joining negotiations on a universally applicable nuclear abolition treaty to prohibit the use, deployment, development, production, stockpiling and transfer of nuclear weapons and requiring their complete elimination. initiate and/or join negotiations on new international treaties and laws to prohibit the development, deployment and use of autonomous weapons (such as killer robots), depleted uranium weapons, weapon systems that are intended for use in and from outer space, and weapons that leave explosive remnants and toxic legacies in war-affected communities, while mandating the protection of civilians from any new weapons developments for the future.green mp caroline lucas challenged the pm in the debate on 26 september 2014 on military action in iraqwill the prime minister recognise that killing extremists does not kill their ideas? on the contrary  it can often feed their ideas, and for that reason the former mi6 head of counter-terrorism has said that getting saudi arabia and iran around a negotiating table would be far more effective than bombing. why are we not hearing far more from this prime minister about the political and diplomatic solutions to this situation, rather than reaching for the military solution, which could undermine them?70 for the common good: green party general election manifesto 2015green mep keith taylor and palestinekeith taylor is a member of the european parliaments delegation to palestine and has visited the occupied territories. as part of his work, keith has called for israel to end its practice of detaining palestinians without charge, and has supported his constituents in boycott campaigns relating to goods made in illegal israeli settlements. keith has long campaigned for the recognition of palestine and has put his name to a successful resolution calling on the european parliament to recognise palestine as a state.joining up the policiesso what do war, terrorism, food policy and the oil industry have to do with each other? if we didnt depend on oil from the middle east, we wouldnt need to invent reasons to go to war there when supply lines are threatened. if we werent involved in wars in the middle east, terrorism here would lose its raison detre. with less fossil fuel we would have to expand renewables and grow more of our own food, making us far less vulnerable to blockade in any future war. security policy is not just about tanks, its also about acting responsibly and building resilience at home.its another virtuous circle..europethe green party recognises that the uk is part of europe and that we cannot cut ourselves off from our geography or its political realities. our message on europe is positive, not based on fear and nostalgia.much eu action has been progressive: safeguarding basic rights, peace and security achieved through mutual understanding, environmental protection, the spread of culture and ideas, and regulation of the financial system. and in other areas, such as welfare policy, open discussion and coordination are useful.however, we prioritise local self-reliance rather than the eus unsustainable economics of free trade and growth. we would not adopt the euro, which cannot work properly without much deeper political integration, and this would be contrary to our policy of subsidiarity.we support the proposal to have an inout referendum so that the british people can have their say. this is because much has changed since the uk joined the common market in 1974. endless debate on membership is a diversion from more important matters, such as ending inequality and adapting our economy to one-planet living.so its yes to europe, yes to reform of the eu but also yes to a referendum. this is the policy that led to the election of an additional green mep, molly scott cato, in the south west last year.migrationmigration is a fact of life. people have always moved within countries and between countries. much of the uks language, culture and way of life has been enriched by successive new arrivals over thousands of years. most families living here will have members of their extended family who live abroad or include members who were born abroad  5 million british citizens live abroad, around 2 million of them in the eu. we take it for granted that we can move to live where we like within our country, and increasingly within europe and further afield, as others do.much of the time, migration is voluntary, is on a relatively small scale and is a positive benefit for all concerned. but, increasingly, people are being forced to move because: climate change affects their environment so that it can no longer support them; the economic opportunities in their home country are so limited that they leave home to work abroad; or war, natural disasters or political repression lead them to become refugees.for the common good: green party general election manifesto 2015 71these pressures lead to growing numbers of people seeking to come to the uk from the eu and elsewhere. but it is wrong to scapegoat immigrants for problems with housing, education, health or local authority services. these problems are the result of successive governments policy failure, which the rest of this manifesto is designed to put right.the green party believes that, in the medium to long term, we must reduce the pressures that lead to involuntary migration. we will: seek through our international policies to reduce war and discourage repressive regimes that lead to the creation of refugees. make a global deal on climate change a priority of our foreign policy, and help poorer countries cope with the climate change. seek to promote ecologically sustainable development in the poorer parts of the world, so that there is greater equality between the richer and poorer nations. promote policies in the eu that improve opportunities across the union and refocus on social and environmental benefits, rather than economic liberalisation.we accept that these policies will take time to work and that we must address immigration as it is here and now. some controls on immigration will be needed for the foreseeable future; for now, we reject an open borders approach. we also reject the imposition of an arbitrary numerical cap on net migration. the latter in particular is impossible to achieve (especially given that there is no control on the numbers emigrating) and leads to many individual injustices.any controls must respect the following principles: mutual legal obligations within the eu on freedom of movement. international obligations to accept refugees, whether seeking sanctuary from wars, political repression or climate change. respect for the integrity of families. the arrival of a grandmother might well have no direct economic effect, but her contribution to family life may contribute hugely to our society. we would in particular abolish the policy that requires a british citizen to have an income of at least 18,600 a year before their partner can come to live in the uk, which discriminates against poorer people, make it much easier for adult dependants, mainly elderly parents, of british citizens to come and live here. no restrictions on foreign students. foreign students contribute hugely to our education system, both financially and in terms of the wider perspectives they bring. they also take back to their home countries skills that they have learnt here that will be valuable at home and positive attitudes towards the uk. in particular we would allow students to work in the uk for two years after graduation; widen the youth mobility scheme to allow those from poorer countries to participate. no priority simply for economic reasons. we would in particular aim to retain more of those trained in the uk in the healthservice so that we have less need to take health service workers from countries that can ill afford to lose them. we would also: review the rules for those wishing to set up or do business here to ensure they are not discriminatory against smaller businesses. not simply accept people just because they are rich. the london housing market in particular has been gravely distorted by the number of rich migrants buying property, bidding up prices all along the housing chain. ensure that no prospective immigrant is held in detention. as a matter of urgency, the administrative detention of children and pregnant women should cease immediately. review the nationality, immigration and asylum act 2002, particularly with regard to issues of access to legal advice, childcare and levels of subsistence allowance, and reintroduce legal aid for reasonable levels of immigration and asylum work.in addition, once immigrants have arrived, we would:assist integration by making available free or affordable english or welsh language lessons to all new immigrants who want them, costing about 200 million a year.open up ways for existing irregular migrants who have been here for three years to become legal. in particular, a legal status must be provided for people who have not succeeded in their claim for humanitarian protection but who cannot be returned to their country of origin owing to the political situation there.72for the common good: green party general election manifesto 2015 ratify the international labour organizations convention on domestic workers. review asylum procedures to ensure that destitution plays no role in the asylum process by allowing those seeking sanctuaryto work. ensure that those who have been trafficked are not subject to summary deportation; we must protect the victims of trafficking. they should receive a temporary right to stay and have the same right to apply to remain as others seeking to migrate.trade, aid and grassroots developmentpeople around the world have their own strategies and priorities for improving their lives and communities. development should not be directed by rich countries, which too often have their own business interests in mind. instead we need to provide the political space, democratic voice and appropriate resources to enable people in all countries to pursue their own chosen directions in ways that work for them.international trade can benefit or harm the worlds people, depending on its nature. genuinely fair trade, alongside sustainable haulage practices, can bring benefits for all of us. but ever-growing trade, over ever-growing distances and with the sole aim of making a profit can make life difficult for workers and is a sure-fire way of exceeding the limits of our finite planet.similarly, the worlds current structure of international institutions and trade rules can put less developed economies at a disadvantage, while making it easy for global corporations to buy up their land and resources. we need to work with others around the world to reform and reinvent these institutions so that they facilitate greater global equality and justice. the green party will: advocate for ambitious sustainable development goals, including a commitment to end aids, tb and malaria; action to eliminate violence against women and girls; and practical measures to eradicate poverty and reduce inequality. take real action to end tax evasion and avoidance and transfer mispricing by transnational corporations, which steals resources especially from poorer countries. support global efforts to develop a fairer global tax system. put a stop to the corporate takeover of african food by ending uk funding of the g8s new alliance for food security andnutrition. promote fair trade, in particular seeking to ensure that workers in poor countries receive decent pay and conditions within international labour organization (ilo) standards. initiate democratic discussions, alongside international trade unions, citizen groups and the ilo, to investigate the potential for a global minimum wage to address in-work poverty and exploitation. ensure uk companies operating abroad respect international human rights and environmental standards and do not encourage corruption, enforcing the un convention against corruption and the oecd anti-bribery convention, and reporting fully upon their activities. ensure that every country has the political space to make its own democratic choices, without pressure to prise open its economy for free trade. in particular, we oppose the transatlantic trade and investment partnership (see the green party opposes the transatlantic trade and investment partnership box). ensure that trade deals allow poor countries to control their economies; we will take the uk out of trade agreements that go against this. support the rights of indigenous people to control their own lands and resources.the world has become a very unequal place. rich countries such as the uk have benefited from global flows of wealth while poorer countries and groups have tended to lose out. some transfers of resources from rich countries to poorer ones are therefore needed in order to redress the balance and allow poorer countries to improve living standards. we will: fight for the writing-off of international debts for the poorest countries and limiting repayments for other low-income countries, to ensure they can fund decent public services for their people. increase the overseas aid budget from 0.7% of gdp to 1.0% of gdp over the parliament, costing around 6 billion a year in 2019. aid will not be tied, and will be distributed in ways that are focused on poverty eradication, supporting grassroots initiatives, womens rights and environmental sustainability while respecting local priorities. help poorer countries to fund climate change adaptation and build resilient communities through the un adaptation fund. we recognise that the uk owes them a climate debt for our disproportionately high emissions and contributions to global pollution and climate damage.for the common good: green party general election manifesto 2015 73the green party opposes the transatlantic trade and investment partnership (ttip)ttip is globalisation in its worst form, designed to submit democratically elected governments to the will of private corporations. companies will be able to take legal action against governments that they think threaten their profits. national policies in eu countries for health, environmental, consumer and social protection could be challenged by companies from anywhere in the world in private international tribunals, run by corporate lawyers.under ttip: attempts to bring the national health service and the railways back into public ownership could be financially penalised or blocked; authorisations for genetically modified organisms may be accelerated at european level and risk assessment standards lowered; and regulation of banks and the financial industry would be harder, if not impossible.74 for the common good: green party general election manifesto 2015imagine crime falling year on year because the causes of crime are being dealt with  unemployment, insecurity at home, school exclusions, inequality, mental health issues, drugs. imagine a prison population at the european average rather than way over it. picture prisons in public hands and actually rehabilitating prisoners. have you been a victim of crime? picture restorative justice, which gives you a voice and helps the offender to take responsibility and make amends.its been said that, the more dysfunctional a society is, the more laws it has. here is how dysfunctional the uk has become: under margaret thatcher there were 1,724 new laws per year; under john major there were 2,402 per year; under tony blair, 2,663 per year.the uk imprisons more people than any other country in europe. under the coalition, the prison population reached an all-time high of 88,179 in december 2011, and the number of front-line prison officers dropped by 30% between 2010 and 2013. this is a picture of a very uneasy society.the context of crimecrime has a context: 60% of offenders have no qualifications at all; 48% have literacy skills below those expected of an 11 year old; 65% have numeracy skills below those expected of an 11 year old; 67% were unemployed at the time of imprisonment; 49% of prisoners ran away from home as a child; 41% were excluded from school; 71% suffer from two or more mental disorders; 70% of offenders had been drinking at the time the offences for which they were imprisoned were committed; there is more crime in more unequal societies.for the common good: green party general election manifesto 2015 75chapter 14crime and punishmentso: education, employment and security for all  this is the heart of green party crime policy. we would: treat drug addiction as a health issue (see chapter 6 for our health policy). restrict police use of random stop and search powers, which damage police and youth relations. improve the design of our cities to provide safer streets and public spaces. focus on crime prevention measures, including more community policing under local democratic control, more local police stations and the return of bus conductors and others who have an important effect on social order. oppose the privatisation of policing and establish a royal commission on policing as a first step towards delivering a service thats fit for purpose. provide proper funding for womens refuges for survivors of domestic violence, and make domestic abuse a specific criminal offence. work to change attitudes towards rape, including improving initial responses to women, early evidence collection and access to justice. abolish police and crime commissioners, and return control of the police to local government.restorative justice and offender rehabilitationonce people have offended, what next? punishment for its own sake (retributive justice) gets us nowhere, and thats why the green party would greatly expand the use of restorative justice, with the offender making up to the victim and the community. this gives victims a voice and helps offenders to see the effects of what they have done. this should enable us substantially to reduce the numbers in prison and reduce reoffending. in particular, we believe there are far too many children in thepenal system.what happens when prisoners are returned to the community? nearly 50% of adult offenders released between april 2011 and march 2012 reoffended. this is a real indictment of what happens to people in prison. the green party would: oppose the privatisation of the probation services. provide access to real work and education, the work to include repairing damage done by crime. provide access to artistic and creative facilities. provide access to literacy and numeracy classes from the first day of imprisonment. operate a smaller prison system, saving 5.5 billion over the course of the parliament. grant prisoners the right to vote. oppose the use of the death penalty abroad.green london assembly member jenny jones saves police road safety unitin 2009, jenny fought the closure of the metropolitan police commercial vehicle education unit, which instructs hgv drivers on road sharing and awareness of vulnerable road users. this unit has now been reinstated within the traffic police section.greens in power carry out our policiesrestorative justice works. in green-led brighton, the number of young people entering the criminal justice system in the city fell over the three successive years to october 2013 as the councils youth crime prevention team joined with police to help young people understand the impact of their behaviour and make amends.76for the common good: green party general election manifesto 2015it does all join up  one fine day in april 2019you leave work at 5 pm on the dot, and check the bus stops electronic display  your bus home is due in 3 minutes. it glides to a stop, electric motor whirring quietly, and you beep on with your smartcard. the buses are not-for-profit now, and cheaper than they were four years ago.you grab a seat and dig out your phone to check your bank balance because today is pay day! youre working as a cleaner at the hospital, so with the 9.60 minimum wage you get around 1,500 a month before tax. the rent controls that were recently brought in mean you dont pay too much to your landlord and, since your home was super-insulated through the green warm deal, your gas bills not much either. with all that, youre getting by pretty comfortably, and managing to save up a bit to buy a house.the bus stops by your sons nursery, where all the kids go free, and he comes tumbling out giggling. together you walk round the corner to your grans new council house for a cup of tea. her carer stays to chat for a few minutes before heading off to visit his next client. he says that since social care is free now, and much better funded, hes finding the work a lot more rewarding and might make a career of it. your gran is cheerful too, happy to be back on her feet after her recent stay in hospital, and glad the whole thing was noticed early and dealt with quickly so she can get on with her life.later, back at home, a child from down the road knocks on your door to ask if your daughter can play out at the park. they are friends from school, the only two kids out of the 20 in their class who have packed lunches now that school dinners are free. they head off to the parks new play area, promising to pick up some milk at the post office on their way back.you sit down at your laptop and start planning your next holiday, two weeks on the beach in cornwall. its a long trek, but the train tickets cost less than you expected and theres a local line that gets you practically to the campsite gate....for the common good: green party general election manifesto 2015 77chapter 15 a postscriptin 2010 the major election issue was the economy, and in particular the state of the public finances. the coalition parties pledged to close the deficit  the gap between government spending and government income. they have not done so; the gap between spending and income in 2009 of 11% of gdp has narrowed, but was still 5% in 2014. this is hardly surprising because the other parties election manifestos gave no costed plans for how they would reduce the deficit. they made promises but gave no details. we were treated to post-election surprises such as increased vat and huge cuts to essential public services such as benefits, libraries, childrens centres and mental health support. by contrast, the green party produced a worked-out financial plan in its 2010 manifesto.again in this manifesto, we are providing a costed plan for how we would protect and improve our nhs, schools and public services, and pay for them with fairer, more progressive taxation. we use current government data and show exactly how we would do things differently. in this financial plan, we take no account of any extra money that could be available to government as a result of regaining control of our money (see the box in chapter 9)  instead, these plans are based on the real-world current economic environment and on strict assumptions about the effects of changes.although it has not been our prime objective to end the current account deficit (that is, including expenditure other than investment) by the end of the parliament, these plans show how we would do it.after a brief note on territorial coverage, there are three sections  our basic economic assumptions, our plans for spending and our plans for taxation. we conclude with the overall effect on government finances and on the gap between spending and income. we are publishing separately an illustrative costing for basic income.note on territorial coveragethis is the manifesto of the green party of england and wales. separate sister green parties cover scotland and northern ireland. many public services are devolved, with the scottish parliament, the welsh assembly or the northern ireland assembly taking responsibility. however, most decisions on government expenditure and on taxation are ultimately taken on a uk basis, this is a uk general election and, despite the fact that this green party covers only england and wales, and to maintain consistency and comparability, all the figures in this chapter are uk figures.78 for the common good: green party general election manifesto 2015chapter 16it does all add up:the financial appendixeconomic assumptionsthe most important assumption is what the government assumes about the growth of the economy. if the economy grows, the revenues from taxation will be larger.both labour and the coalition made optimistic assumptions about growth in 2010. we based our 2010 calculations on lower growth assumptions. in the event, the economy barely grew in the middle of the period and, although we were less wrong than labour or the coalition, we were still some way out. many of the coalitions problems have their origin in this extraordinary optimism about growth. the figures are as follows:growth in real gdp, assumed in 2010 and actual (%)20102011201220132014cumulative 201014labour assumption (from march 2010 budget) coalition assumption (from june 2010 budget) green party assumption (underlying 2010 manifesto) actual growth in real gdp (from ons)2.00 3.00 3.251.20 2.30 2.802.00 2.50 2.002.10 0.90 0.303.25 3.25 15.62.90 2.70 12.52.00 2.00 10.91.70 2.60 7.8the coalition is once again assuming growth of around 12% over the parliament, at around 2.5% each year. we expect growth to slow a little over the parliament. the figures are:coalition assumption (from 2015 budget) 2.50 2.30 2.30 2.30 2.40 12.4green party assumption (underlying this manifesto) 2.50 2.20 2.00 2.00 1.80 10.9using these figures we can then work out our prediction for real gdp in each of the five years of the parliament.government spendingall our figures throughout this manifesto, for both spending and revenues, are in real 2015 terms. our government spending figures are worked out as follows. we use the current government plans for real terms spending in 2015 as a baseline (that is, we repeat the same figure for each year), so we are not taking into account the coalitions overall plans to cut public spending up to 2018. we then express what wed do differently in terms of how much wed increase or reduce each item relative to this baseline figure. in most cases there is some phasing of expenditure, recognising in particular that our changes cannot realistically start with a full years spending in 2015.our additional expenditures include a line for changed interest on the national debt. like the coalition, we would fund the continuing deficit by borrowing. if we reduce the deficit more slowly than the coalitions plans, we would pay extra interest on the accumulated debt, and this line reflects that.assumed growth in real gdp (%)20152016201720182019cumulative 201519our proposed savings are as follows:savings on tax credits through introduction of living wage revenue savings as a result of railway nationalisation not replacing tridentprison savings due to fewer inmatesreduce spending on major roadsefficiency savings on base government expenditure scrap the help to buy scheme1.2 2.4 2.4 2.40.0 1.0 1.0 1.00.3 3.3 3.3 3.30.5 0.5 1.0 1.50.0 1.5 3.0 4.51.1 2.2 3.3 4.50.3 0.6 0.6 0.62.41.03.32.06.05.60.6green party proposed savings ( billion)20152016201720182019total savings3.511.614.717.821.0for the common good: green party general election manifesto 201579our proposed additional expenditures are as follows:green party proposed additional spending ( billion)20152016201720182019economyequity for the green investment bankpublic sector costs of introducing the living wage additional staff for hmrcestablishing community banks networkfunding for monitoring of micro-chipping of dogs extra funding for flood defencesgovernment as insurer of last resortincreased government funding for r&dmajor investment in renewable generation and the national grid r&d for newer renewablesbuildings insulation, mainly housesimproving energy efficiency in industryresolve current nhs funding gapnhs annual additions for ageingincrease in carers allowancefree social care for the elderlyextra cost of organic food in schools and hospitalssubsidy on fresh fruit and vegetables (matches unhealthy food tax)fund to buy out pfisrestoring local authority financesincrease spending on recycling and waste disposal restore cuts to legal aidgreater incentives to work while on benefits net cost of increased child benefitnet cost of change to citizens pension restore the cut in council tax benefitextra funding for disabilityexpansion of social housingremoval of the bedroom tax and other housing benefit cuts right to rent scheme0.5 0.50.4 0.71.0 2.00.2 0.3 0.01 0.010.5 1.00.1 0.10.9 1.9 2.0 6.00.0 0.55.3 9.90.5 1.0 8.4 12.00.0 1.40.8 1.23.8 7.90.5 1.00.0 6.7 0.5 2.510.0 10.01.0 3.00.7 0.7 4.0 5.00.0 15.70.0 25.70.3 0.50.9 1.8 2.5 3.51.2 2.30.1 0.31.0 2.0 5.00.7 0.7 0.83.0 4.0 5.00.5 0.5 0.5 0.01 0.01 0.011.0 1.0 1.00.1 0.1 0.12.8 3.8 4.7 8.0 9.0 10.00.5 0.5 1.09.9 9.9 9.91.0 1.0 1.0 12.0 12.0 12.02.8 4.2 5.71.2 1.2 1.28.2 8.7 9.11.0 1.0 1.06.7 6.7 6.7 1.0 0.5 0.510.0 10.0 10.03.0 4.0 4.00.7 0.7 0.7 6.0 7.0 8.015.8 16.0 16.125.1 24.6 24.00.5 0.5 0.51.8 1.8 1.8 4.5 4.5 4.52.3 2.3 2.30.5 1.0 2.0the earthenergyhealthlocal government and constitutionalsocial securityhousing80for the common good: green party general election manifesto 2015our proposed additional expenditures are as follows (continued):green party proposed additional spending ( billion)20152016201720182019education, training and young peoplefree universal early education and childcare restore education cuts  schoolsfree school mealssmaller class sizesrestore the education maintenance allowance additional funding for further education increase funding for apprenticeshipspackage of youth measures2.0 4.03.5 7.00.3 2.00.1 0.20.3 0.50.8 1.50.3 0.50.6 1.10.4 0.9 0.9 1.70.0 0.00.0 0.00.9 1.82.0 4.0 0.8 2.30.2 0.2 0.03 0.030.3 0.50.03 0.031.0 3.26.0 7.0 8.07.0 7.0 7.02.0 2.0 2.00.3 0.4 0.50.7 0.7 0.71.5 1.5 1.50.5 0.5 0.51.1 1.1 1.10.9 0.9 0.9 1.7 1.7 1.70.1 0.1 0.10.0 1.1 1.11.8 1.8 1.84.0 4.0 4.0 3.5 4.8 6.10.2 0.2 0.2 0.03 0.03 0.030.5 0.5 0.50.03 0.03 0.035.3 8.0 11.0pay salaries for foster carerssubsidise public transport to reduce bring railways into public ownership interest on 23 billion debt once rail extra annual expenditure on walking free local travel for young peoplefaresin public ownership and cyclingtransportglobalincrease aid to 1% of gdpprovide free english classes for immigrantsadditional funding for womens and rape crisis centres increase funding for the artsreinstate equality and human rights commission funding increased interest on the national debtmiscellaneoustotal new spending60.3156.6169.0182.5197.8finally, to get to our overall spending plans, we take the baseline plans for expenditure, add on our proposed extra expenditure above, and subtract our proposed savings:green party proposed total government expenditure ( billion)201520162017201820192015 baselineadd proposed additional spending subtract proposed savings743 743 743 74360 157 169 1833 12 15 1874319821total government expenditure799888897907919for the common good: green party general election manifesto 201581taxation and revenueswe start from the governments plans for its revenues, converted to the 2015 price base using the gdp deflator. in this case we assume that the revenues are proportional to gdp. because we have assumed that gdp is lower than the government assumption (because we expect less growth), our baseline revenues are also lower. as with the spending figures, there is some phasing to allow changes to come into effect.our proposed increases in revenues are as follows:wealth taxrobin hood taxtax avoidance and evasionraise additional rate of income taxincrease corporation taxremove capital gains tax allowancereform of inheritance taxreform of council taxreintroduce fuel duty escalatorvat and fuel duty on aviationintroduce environmental taxesincrease alcohol and tobacco taxesunhealthy food taxabolition of mortgage interest relief for landlords increase in income tax and ni because of living wage abolition of upper ni thresholdreduction of tax relief on pensionschanges that will reduce government revenues are as follows:increase tax-free amount on rent a room scheme write off student loansend student tuition feesreplace student maintenance loans with grants reduce employers national insuranceabolish bbc licence feeallow fe colleges to reclaim vatreduce vat on restaurants, tourism, etc. to 5% vat reduction to 5% for home renovation0.00.06.01.14.21.50.00.02.25.01.00.00.02.90.50.00.00.11.10.00.00.01.60.13.00.810.0 15.05.0 15.012.0 18.02.2 2.212.5 12.53.1 3.21.0 1.00.0 0.04.3 6.516.0 16.02.0 3.01.4 2.86.7 6.75.8 5.81.0 1.014.5 29.810.4 21.30.2 0.22.2 2.20.3 0.90.1 0.410.0 15.03.2 3.20.2 0.26.0 6.01.6 1.620.0 25.020.0 20.024.0 30.02.3 2.312.5 12.53.3 3.31.0 1.00.1 0.18.6 10.816.0 16.04.0 5.04.2 5.76.7 6.75.8 5.81.1 1.130.5 31.121.8 22.20.2 0.22.2 2.21.4 2.00.7 1.020.0 25.03.2 3.20.2 0.26.0 6.01.6 1.6green party proposed revenue increases ( billion)20152016201720182019total increase in revenues24.4108.0159.9181.8198.6green party revenue decreases ( billion)20152016201720182019total revenue decreases6.723.829.635.541.382for the common good: green party general election manifesto 2015this leads to the following overall government revenues:green party total government revenues ( billion)20152016201720182019government baseline revenues on green party growth assumption add green party additional taxationsubtract green party revenue reductions667 69324 1087 24710 726 741160 182 19930 3541total government revenues685777840872898green party tax and spend plans as a proportion of gdpto sum up, this leads to the following predictions for the deficit and for our plans as a proportion of gdp compared with the coalitions plans:green party predicted deficit and proportions of gdp20152016201720182019green party prediction for gdp ( billion, real 2015 terms)green party proposed total government expenditure ( billion) green party total government revenues ( billion)green party predicted deficit ( billion)green party spending as % of gdp green party revenues as % of gdp green party deficit as % of gdpcoalition plans for spending as % of gdp coalition plans for revenues as % of gdp coalition plans for deficit as % of gdp coalition plans for deficit ( billion)1,885 1,926 799 888685 7771,965 2,004897 907 919840 872 8982,040114 111 57 35 2142.4% 46.1% 45.6% 45.3%36.3% 40.3% 42.7% 43.5%6.1% 5.8% 2.9% 1.7% 39.4% 38.0% 36.7% 36.0%35.4% 36.0% 36.1% 36.2%4.0% 2.0% 0.6% 0.2%75 39 12 545.1%44.0%1.0% 36.0%36.3%0.3%7existing government plans for investment amount to around 70 billion by 2019. our plans add around a further net 5 billion of investment, making 75 billion in all, which is 3.7% of gdp. we consider that it is appropriate for the government to borrow to fund investment. accordingly, our plans show a surplus of 2.7% (3.7% minus 1.0%) on current account by the end ofthe parliament.for the common good: green party general election manifesto 2015 8384 for the common good: green party general election manifesto 2015for the common good: green party general election manifesto 2015 85get involved@thegreenparty facebook.com/thegreenparty www.greenparty.org.ukabout this publicationthis publication has not been paid for by big business or corporate interests, but has been supported and funded by ordinary people and printed on 100% post-consumer fibre, fsc recycled certified and pcf (process chlorine free) paper.published and promoted by judy maciejowska on behalf of the green party of england and wales,both at development house, 56-64 leonard street, london ec2a 4ltfor the common good: green party general election manifesto 2015 86manifesto 2015prosperity for allbalance the budget fairly and invest to build a high-skill, low-carbon economyour environmentprotectedprotect nature and fight climate change with five green lawsopportunity forevery childguarantee education funding from nursery to 19 and qualified teachers in every classfair taxescut your taxes by an additional 400 by raising the personal allowance to 12,500quality healthcare for allinvest 8 billion to improve our nhs and guarantee equal care for mental healthmanifesto 20155contents6liberal democrat manifesto 2015610142036506276889010011412613812 34567 8 910 11introduction by nick cleggbritain in 2020: the liberal democrat visionresponsible finances:balancing the budget in a fair wayprosperity for all:building a sustainable economyreal help for family finances:tax, pensions and consumer rightsan opportunity society:world class education for allbuilding a healthier society:protecting the nhs and improving healthbetter places to live:communities farming and the natural environmentgreen britain guarantee:five green lawsaffordable homes for all:meeting our housing needsfreedom and opportunity:equal rights for allsecure communities:policing, justice and the border forcepower to the people:devolution democracy and citizenshipbritain in the world: global action for security and prosperity7introductiondear friend,when liberal democrats launched our 2010 general electionmanifesto, few people expected that many of the policies it contained would be implemented by the next government. but thats what happened: three quarters of those policies formed the backbone of the coalitions programme.front-page commitments like raising the income tax threshold and investing in the poorest schoolchildren through the pupil premium became flagship coalition policies.with liberal democrats in government to deliver them, those policies have started the work of building a stronger economy anda fairer society, with opportunity spread across the whole united kingdom.despite tough economic circumstances, those policies are making a difference to peoples lives and helping make britain a freer, greener, more liberal country.but our mission has only just begun. you cant build a stronger economy and a fairer society, and spread opportunity to every citizen, in five years.for the first time, this is a liberal democrat manifesto that builds on a record of policies delivered in national government.we can say we will finish the job of balancing the books, but do so fairly, because we have started that job in this parliament.we can say we will cut taxes for working people by raising the tax-free allowance to 12,500 because we have raised the tax-free allowance every year since 2010.we can say we will protect funding for education from nursery to 19 because we have protected schools funding and invested in early9years education in government.we can say we will increase health funding and invest in mentalhealth because we have protected the nhs budget in government and introduced the first ever waiting-time standards for mental health.and we can say we will protect our environment because we have almost trebled the amount of electricity from renewable energy in this parliament.in our fast-changing world, the fundamental question political parties face is: do we want to continue to be an open society, confident and optimistic about our place in the world, or do we want to become a closed one, increasingly insular and backward-looking? for liberal democrats there is only ever one answer: we want an optimistic, open-hearted and outward-looking united kingdom.in government for the next five years, liberal democrats will continue to build a stronger economy and a fairer society with opportunity for everyone. this manifesto sets out how.yours,nick clegg10liberal democrat manifesto 20151112this manifesto is a five year plan to build a fair, free and open society in our united kingdom. follow this plan and by 2020, our economy will be strong, sustainable and fair, our public finances will be healthy again and there will be jobs that last in every part of the country. follow this plan and there will be opportunity for everyone to get on and live the life they want at work, at home, online and in our communities.we have to finish the job of sorting out the uks public finances  but we must do it fairly, making sure the wealthiest pay their fair share. only the liberal democrat plan will keep the uk on track, balancing the books in 2017/18 so we can get back to investing in the public services and infrastructure that help make our country strong. in 2020, debt will be falling as a share of our economy for the fourth year in a row, steadily rebuilding our national resilience against future economic shocks.our economy will be thriving, delivering balanced growth with jobs that last in every nation and region. government will take a long-term approach to supporting business and industry, helping supply credit, skilled workers and infrastructure. over a third ofbritain in 2020: the liberal democrat visionliberal democrat manifesto 2015uk electricity will come from renewables, not least from scottish generators, and we will be leading the world in the technologies of the future, from electric cars to tidal power.britain will be the place to be if you want to thrive in advanced manufacturing, science, creative, digital and green industries, and our country will be open to ambitious entrepreneurs and thinkers from overseas. we will finally be building enough homes, every year, to meet our needs.by 2020, our plan will bring together a lifetime of opportunities for every generation, enhancing the quality of all our lives. mothers and fathers will be able to share the joys and struggles of early parenthood with extended shared parental leave. free, high- quality childcare will be available the moment parental leave is over. education will prosper under the liberal democrats.young people will leave school and college confident about their future: we will have doubled the number of businesses hiring apprentices.society will be more equal. a million more women will be enabled to work, with fairer rules to help everyone juggle family life, caring responsibilities and the world of work. carers will be treated with respect and given more help, including a bonus of 250 to spend however they choose. the tax system will be fairer: people willnot pay income tax on the first 12,500 they earn, but strict rules will be in place to make sure the richest pay their fair share and corporations cannot dodge their tax responsibilities. targeted green taxes will discourage pollution and reward sustainability.there will be more jobs in our economy, with steadily higher wages and better employment rights. with universal credit and reforms to disability benefits, it will always pay to work, and everyone who needs a helping hand will get one. as you work, and as you save, you will feel confident about life after retirement, too. millions more will have a workplace pension. our triple lock will protect the state pension, our new single tier pension will mean your savings are your own to keep.our nhs will have the money it needs, and the scottish parliament will have the resources to make sure mental healthwill have equal status with physical health. those facing anxiety and depression will be seen swiftly, people struggling not to harm themselves will find emergency help at a&e and teenagers suffering13from eating disorders will get the help they need close to home.five green laws will be on the statute books, protecting nature and wildlife in britain and across the world, cleaning up our air and helpingfight climate change.people will be more free. a second freedoms act will haveembedded citizens rights to freedom of speech and protest. the human rights act will remain, with childrens rights protected in law too. the culture of everyday sexism will be declining, with young people taught in school about respect in relationships and sexual consent. online, people will no longer be worried that the government is monitoring their every keystroke: a digital bill of rights will have enshrined enduring principles of privacy and helped keep the internet open.our politics will be open, and fairer too. 2020 will be the first general election in which 16 year olds can vote  the first generation to cast their first ballot in a fair stv voting system and the first generation to vote for the house of lords. but every 16 year old will know its not just uk elections that matter: scotland will have home rule powers as proposed by the cross-party smith commission, and comprehensive devolution to wales and northern ireland will be completed too, keeping the course to a federal uk.in 2020 britain will be a force for good in the world, leading global action against climate change, tax avoidance and internationalcrime, working to prevent conflict and offer humanitarian aid, and promoting trade, development and prosperity. we will still be meeting our commitments to spend 0.7% of our national income helpingthe worlds poorest people. and we will be standing tall in our own neighbourhood, a leader in the european union again. we will have secured real reform of the eu to deliver more jobs, more growth, and more security. our borders will be secure and our immigration system fair. we will be working across borders to tackle crime and keep britain safe.our liberal democrat plan will build a stronger economy and a fairer society, in a truly united kingdom. our plan will deliver opportunity for everyone.14liberal democrat manifesto 20151516responsible financesbalancing thebudget in afair way1a responsible approach to tackling the deficit and our countrys debts is essential because it underpins everything else we want to achieve. in the last five years, we have worked hard to bring balance back to britains public finances. the deficit is now half what it was when we took office in 2010. nevertheless, there is still work to be done. only liberal democrats will complete the job on time in a way that is fair, enables sustainable growth and protects public services.1718responsible finances underpin every good government. high debt and deficits are a risk to economic stability and it is simply not right to borrow too much money and expect our children to pay it back. debt interest payments last year were 46 billion: more than we spent on schools.a responsible approach to tackling the deficit and our countrys debts is essential because it underpins everything else we want to achieve. in the last five years, we have worked hard to bring balance back to britains public finances. the deficit is now half what it was when we took office in 2010. nevertheless, there is still work to be done. only liberal democrats will complete the job on time in a way that is fair, enables sustainable growth and protects public services.1.1 balancing the budgetwe will complete the job of balancing the budget  on time, infull, and fairly. the liberal democrat objective is to eradicate the structural current budget deficit by 2017/18 and have debt falling as a percentage of national income, so it is back to sustainable levels by the middle of the next decade.liberal democrat manifesto 2015in 2010, liberal democrats insisted the coalition adopt a fairer approach to dealing with the deficit, using both spending cuts and tax rises, than the conservatives had planned. this mixed approach was much more in line with proposals set out in the liberal democrat manifesto. the conservatives now want to scrap this approach entirely and use only spending cuts to finish the job. we reject this proposal, which would do significant damage to britains public services and require punitive cuts to benefits on which some of the most vulnerable people depend.we are determined to stick with the approach we set out in 2010  a fair way of restoring the nations finances. so as we finish the job of balancing the books, we will use taxes on the wealthiest, on banks and big business and on polluters, and we will bear downon tax avoidance, to limit the impact of deficit reduction on public services. we do not think low and middle income earners should bear the burden of tax rises: our plans do not require any increase in the headline rates of income tax, national insurance, vat or corporation tax. in fact, our plans enable us to continue to cut taxes for people on low and middle incomes by raising the tax-free personal allowance.having a balanced approach on tax and spending enables us to:w protect the least well off in society and users of public services from the impact of measures taken to tackle the deficit.w invest, over the parliament, extra money for the nhs, essential to protect our health service.w extend the current uk budget protection for education to include early years and 16-19 provision. this will result in a stable funding platform for the scottish parliament to invest in children and young people.w limit reductions in departmental spending to less than half the rate agreed for 2015/16.w limit welfare reductions so we do not destroy the essential safety net that protects us all in times of crisis.w continue to spend 0.7% of gross national income on international development aid, helping the poorest in the world.we will carry out a full spending review after the general election. building on the successes of this parliament, we will focus on delivering efficiency, funding proven spend-to-save initiatives and investing in technology to get public services and frontline staff online. the aim of everything that government does will be to help people improve their quality of life and wellbeing, especially the most vulnerable and least well off.191responsible finances | balancing the budget in a fair wayborrow cutless lessthan thanlabourtories1.2 looking to the futureonce we have balanced the books, we will ensure that overall public spending grows again in line with the economy. this will ensure we can improve key public services and enable public sector workers to receive fair and affordable increases in their pay. we understand that public services depend upon high-quality and dedicated staff.we will follow two new fiscal rules.our first fiscal rule is that, from 2017/18, debt must fall as a proportion of our national income every year  except during a recession  so it reaches sustainable levels around the middle of the next decade.our second fiscal rule is that over the economic cycle we will balance the overall budget, no longer borrowing to pay for everyday expenditure. we will make one significant exception to enable us to invest in the things that will help our economy grow. provided the debt rule is met, the government will be able to borrow for capital spending that enhances economic growth or financial stability, enabling us to increase this productive investment.in our spending review we will set out long-term plans for capital expenditure, and ensure that investment in infrastructure, including in housing and energy efficiency, continues to rise both in absolute terms and as a share of the economy.our plan to finish the job and balance the booksw aim to balance the structural current budget by 2017/18.w set a course to reduce debt as a share of national income. w make deficit reduction fair by ensuring the richest paytheir fair share and corporations cannot avoid their taxresponsibilities.w set new fiscal rules to balance the budget while allowingborrowing for productive investment.w increase public spending again in line with the economyonce the budget is balanced.211responsible finances | balancing the budget in a fair way22prosperity for allbuilding asustainableeconomy2britain needs a strong economy not just to help fund public services but because growth and enterprise create jobs and opportunities for all. liberal democrats want an economy that is strong, green, open and fair. as britain recovers, we must make sure we dont return to growth based on personal debt and speculation, but build prosperity and wellbeing that last, for everyone.2324britain needs a strong economy not just to help fund public services but because growth and enterprise create jobs and opportunities for all. liberal democrats want an economy that is strong, green, open and fair. as britain recovers, we must make sure we dont return to growth based on personal debt and speculation, but build prosperity and wellbeing that last, for everyone.we will grow a high-skill, low-carbon economy by supporting education, training, infrastructure, innovation and technology. with a stable, competitive business environment and investment in green industries and infrastructure, we will ensure growth is embedded in every part of the uk.we have made a big start in government: reforming the banking system; creating the worlds first green investment bank; enabling unprecedented investment in low-carbon energy; introducing a regional growth fund and a bold new industrial strategy to support growth and high-skilled jobs; delivering more than two million new apprenticeships; ensuring transparency of company ownership and promoting more diversity in business leadership.now is the time to push forward and reject any temptation to go back to the old economy. whether its fighting for proper investment in renewable energy, or working to build a high-skill, flexible labour market: liberal democrats will ensure britain doesnt return to the mistakes of the past.liberal democrat manifesto 2015a record of deliverya promise of morebillions invested in growing modern british businesses with our industrial strategy, business bank and regional growth fundreformed the banking system to separate retail and investment banking and help rebuild our economythe worlds first green investment bank and low-carbon energy market, helping almost treble renewable electricity generationbiggest rail investment since victorian times, driving record numbers of train journeysdouble innovation spend in our economy, making the uk a world leader in advanced manufacturing, clean technology and digital industriesgrow a competitive banking sector, support alternative finance providers and improve accessto finance for business and consumersexpand the green investment bank and set a legally binding decarbonisation target to green our electricityenable more people to travel with rail upgrades across the country and hs22.1 economic and industrial growthto deliver a balanced economy with strengths in every part of the uk, britain needs a highly skilled workforce and flexible business support and finance. we must continue to invest to grow sectors like advanced manufacturing that can provide high-skilled, sustainable jobs, open up the supply chain to more small and medium-sized businesses and support firms bringing activity back to britain.we will:w continue to develop our industrial strategy, working with sectors which are critical to britains ability to trade internationally  motor vehicles, aerospace, low-carbon energy, chemicals, creative industries, offshore and subsea technology and more.w develop the skilled workforce needed to support this growth with a major expansion of high-quality and advanced apprenticeships,252prosperity for all | building a sustainable economyoffering vocational education on a par with academic qualifications, backed up with new sector-led national colleges. we will develop a national skills strategy for key sectors, including low-carbon technologies, to help match skills and people.w aim to double innovation and research spending across the economy, supported by greater public funding on a longer timescale, more catapult innovation and technology centres and support for green innovation from the green investment bank. we will continue to ringfence the science budget and ensure that, by 2020, both capital and revenue spending have increased at least in line with inflation.w build on the success of the regional growth fund, which has already created more than 100,000 jobs and secured 1.8 billion of private investment. we will continue the fund throughout the next parliament.w devolvemoreeconomicdecision-makingtolocalareas,building on the success of city deals and growth deals, prioritising the transfer of transport, housing and infrastructure funding, skills training and back-to-work support.w provide further support to medium-sized businesses through a one-stop-shop for accessing government support, a dedicated unit in hmrc and the development of management skills.w aim to stimulate local economies, working with local enterprise partnerships to improve their effectiveness and coordination. we will: use central government public procurement policy as a tool of local growth and community development, for example by purchasing from diverse sources and using local labour, goods and services, and encourage local government to do the same. continue our work to open up public procurement to small and medium-sized companies and to the voluntary sector. develop platforms on which government can provide feedback on its suppliers to help quality providers to grow.2.2 banking and financial reformthe financial crisis of 2008 caused real damage to our economy including one of the largest budget deficits in the world and banks unable to support the real economy. liberal democrats have ensured radical reform of the banking industry to make banks safe and no longer requiring a taxpayer safety net.26liberal democrat manifesto 2015building on this progress, we will:w complete implementation of the new rules to separate retail banking from investment banking, working with the financial services industry to promote integrity, accountability and value across the sector.w expand the british business bank to perform a more central role in the economy, tackling the shortage of equity capital for growing firms and providing long-term capital for medium-sized businesses.w develop the uk banking sector to promote competition and innovation by: facilitating new entrants, including through public procurement policy. encouraging the growth of crowdfunding and alternative finance models, encouraging local authorities to use these platforms to improve credit access in their areas. promoting a new community banking sector to support small and medium-sized enterprises and social enterprises. taking forward the recently commissioned study by the british business bank into the sustainability of community development finance institutions.w ensure access to finance for all, tackling discrimination in the provision of financial services and supporting products that increase financial inclusion.w continue the banking levy and introduce a time-limited supplementary corporation tax charge on the banking sector to ensure it continues to make a fair contribution to fiscal consolidation.2.3 creating a stable and competitive environment for growthbritain needs a stable and competitive environment for growth; this is essential to attract and sustain new businesses and new jobs. britain is not just a part of the european economy  we have to compete with the developing economies of asia and latin america, which are increasingly powering ahead.we need to lock in macroeconomic stability, including low inflation, and reduce the risks of a return to the economics of boom and bust. and we need a tax system that is simple, fair and competitive  which attracts and retains jobs in our country, while ensuring business makes a fair contribution.272prosperity for all | building a sustainable economy28w continue to support an independent bank of england, with a mandate to keep inflation low and stable to support sustainable growth. we will protect the new regulatory framework, which ensures the bank of england has the necessary tools to help avoid a return to boom and bust.w continue to reform business tax to ensure it stays competitive, making small and medium-sized enterprises the priority for any business tax cuts. we will work to adjust the tax system away from subsidy of high leverage debt and tackle the bias against equity investment.w reform and improve the regulatory policy committee to reduce regulatory uncertainty and remove unnecessary business regulation. we understand that well-designed regulation, focused on outcomes rather than processes, has a vital role in creating markets and driving investment and will use it, in particular, to promote low-carbon and resource-efficient innovation.in england we will complete the ongoing review of business rates, prioritising reforms that lessen the burden on smaller businesses, ensure high streets remain competitive and promote more efficient use of land. liberal democrats remain committed to introducing land value tax (lvt), which would replace business rates inthe longer term and could enable the reduction or abolition of other taxes. we will extend the business rates review to ensureit considers the implementation of lvt, as well as interim reforms like site value rating that could be completed within five years. we will charge the land registry with completing registration of all substantial land and property holdings in england and wales by 2020.2.4 green jobs and industrynew world markets are developing in low-carbon and resource- efficient technologies. britains real strengths in sectors like offshore wind power and low-carbon vehicles, and in green finance, make us well placed to compete.we must make sure green industries can reach their full potential and build on successes in increasing recycling to shift towards a so-called circular economy in which we use natural resources efficiently and minimise waste. (see also section 6.2)we will:w pass a zero carbon britain act to set a new legally binding targetwe will:liberal democrat manifesto 2015to bring net greenhouse gas emissions to zero by 2050. w realise the full potential of the green investment bank byincreasing its capitalisation, expanding its remit, allowing it toraise funds independently and enabling it to issue green bonds.w place the natural capital committee (ncc) on the same statutoryfooting as the committee on climate change through ournature act. we will task the ncc with identifying the key natural resources being used unsustainably and recommending legally binding targets for reducing their net consumption; and introduce incentives for businesses to improve resource efficiency.w help incentivise sustainable behaviour by increasing the proportion of tax revenue accounted for by green taxes.w grow the market for green products and services with steadily higher green criteria in public procurement policy, extending procurement requirements more widely through the public sector including to the nhs and academy schools. in particular we will deliver ambitious reductions in energy use.w increaseresearchanddevelopmentandcommercialisation support in four key low-carbon technologies where britain could lead the world: tidal power, carbon capture and storage, energy storage and ultra-low emission vehicles.w ensure uk trade and investment and uk export finance can prioritise support for key sectors identified in our industrial strategy, including exports of green products and technologies, and press for higher environmental standards for export credit agencies throughout the oecd.w encourage the creation of green financial products to bring consumer capital into green industries.we will improve the way government handles the cross-cutting challenges of delivering green growth and fighting climate change, establishing a senior cabinet committee to coordinate action and bringing together officials in inter-departmental units on issueslike air quality and resource management. we will replicate the success of the office for budget responsibility with an office for environmental responsibility scrutinising the governments efforts to meet its environmental targets.2.5 making the connection: transport infrastructureliberal democrats are leading the renewal of britains ageing infrastructure but we still have decades of under-investment to catch up on. we need better transport infrastructure, a modern railway system, and less congestion on our roads.we have established our second fiscal rule precisely so we can invest in productive infrastructure to help the economy grow.292prosperity for all | building a sustainable economy30we will:w set out 10-year rolling capital investment plans.w developacomprehensiveplantoelectrifytheoverwhelmingmajority of the uk rail network, reopen smaller stations, restore twin-track lines to major routes and proceed with hs2, as the first stage of a high-speed rail network to scotland.w investinmajortransportimprovementsandinfrastructure.wewill: deliver the transport for the north strategy to promotegrowth, innovation and prosperity across northern england. develop more modern, resilient links to and within thesouth west peninsula to help develop and diversify theregional economy complete east-west rail, connecting up oxfordand cambridge and catalysing major new housingdevelopment. ensure londons transport infrastructure is improvedto withstand the pressure of population and economicgrowth.w work to encourage further private sector investment in rail freightterminals and rail-connected distribution parks. we will set a clear objective to shift more freight from road to rail and change planning law to ensure new developments provide good freight access to retail, manufacturing and warehouse facilities.liberal democrat manifesto 2015w ensure our airport infrastructure meets the needs of a modern and open economy, without allowing emissions from aviationto undermine our goal of a zero-carbon britain by 2050. we will carefully consider the conclusions of the davies review into runway capacity and develop a strategic airports policy for the whole of the uk in the light of those recommendations and advice from the committee on climate change. we remain opposed to any expansion of heathrow, stansted or gatwick and any new airport in the thames estuary, because of local issues of air and noise pollution. we will ensure no net increase in runways across the uk.w ensurenewrailfranchisesincludeastrongerfocusoncustomers, including requirements to integrate more effectively with other modes of transport and a programme of investment in new stations, lines and station facilities. we will continue the access for all programme, improving disabled access to public transport.modern light rail systems, like croydon tramlink and manchester metrolink, have brought significant benefits to passengers. wewill encourage local authorities to consider trams alongside other options, and support a new generation of light rail and ultra-light rail schemes in towns and cities where local people want them.2.6 low-carbon energyour reforms of the electricity market have already created the worlds first low-carbon electricity market and will stimulate up to 250,000 green jobs across the uk by 2020. since 2010, energy demand has fallen by 2.5% a year and renewable electricity generation has almost trebled.but we need to go further and faster to meet our goal of reducing energy demand by 50% by 2030. if we do not speed up energy efficiency investment, our buildings will continue to leak energy and waste money and our businesses will fail to compete internationally. we will ensure we create a low-carbon economy at the lowest cost for consumers.we will:w make saving energy a top infrastructure priority, stimulating private sector demand with our new electricity demand reduction market, new market-shaping energy efficiency standards, support for industry, particularly smes, and a programme of tax incentives and public investment. our plans for insulating homes are set out in more detail in section 7.5, below.w stimulate a minimum of 100 billion more private investment in312prosperity for all | building a sustainable economy32low-carbon energy infrastructure by 2020.w set a legally binding decarbonisation target range for 2030 for thepower sector of 50100g of co2 per kwh, which can largely be achieved by expansion of renewables, with an indicative target of 60% of electricity from renewable sources by 2030. we will support investment in energy storage and smart grid technology to enable this higher reliance on renewables.w work with the independent regulator ofgem to ensure the costs of electricity distribution and transmission infrastructure are allocated efficiently and fairly between consumers and generators across the country, and develop more european electricity interconnection capacity.w regulate to end the use of unabated coal in electricity generation by 2025 because of its high carbon emissions and impact on local air quality, and require any new gas stations built after 2030 to be fitted with carbon capture and storage (ccs) technology. we will implement a second phase of ccs projects by 2020.w expand community energy, building on britains first ever community energy strategy with additional financial and regulatory support. we will encourage councils to be proactive in delivering energy saving and electricity generation.w encourageonshorewindinappropriatelocations,helpingmeet our climate targets at least cost. we will end ideologically motivated interference in local planning decisions for wind farms by government ministers.w accept that new nuclear power stations can play a role in low-liberal democrat manifesto 2015carbon electricity supply provided concerns about safety, disposal of waste and cost are adequately addressed and without public subsidy for new build.w use biomass primarily for heating and small-scale power generation, act to encourage the wider use of biogas and argue for the reform of eu policies on biofuels and biomass which help drive deforestation, including ending all support for food-crop- based biofuels after 2020.w continue to back new entrants to the energy market, smart meters and faster switching to promote proper competition, aiming for at least 30% of the household market to be supplied by competitors to the big 6 by 2020.the uk has significant stores of unconventional gas, which could be accessed through the process known as fracking. it is vital that efforts to access this gas be properly regulated to protect our natural environment. liberal democrats in governmenthave introduced the worlds most robust regulatory regime for unconventional gas, including banning drilling in national parks, and will take two further steps to ensure any shale gas contributes to a faster transition to a low-carbon economy.we will:w establish a low-carbon transition fund using 50% of any tax revenues from shale gas to fund energy efficiency, community energy, low-carbon innovation and renewable heat.w require that once a shale gas well is finished, it must be offered at no cost to geothermal heat developers, to enable faster expansion of this renewable technology.2.7 an open, trading nationas a major global economy, we must promote open markets and free trade, both within the european union and beyond. only as a full member of a reformed european union can we be certain britains businesses will have access to markets in europe and beyond.liberal democrats believe we should welcome talented people from abroad, encourage visitors and tourists who contribute enormously to our economic growth, and give sanctuary to refugees fleeing persecution. immigration procedures must be robust and fair, and the uk must remain open to visitors who boost our economy, and migrant workers who play a vital role in business and public services.332prosperity for all | building a sustainable economynumber of people in employment32313029282730.9 millionlabourlib demsforecast200820092010201120122013201420152016201720182019millionswe will:w remain a committed member of the eu so we can complete the single market in areas including online industries, the energy market and services, and help negotiate eu international trade agreements, opening opportunities for british businesses.w support single market disciplines in relation to competition and state aid rules while creating a stronger public interest test for takeovers in research-intensive activities.w continue to allow high-skill immigration to support key sectors of the economy, and ensure work, tourist and family visit visas are processed quickly and efficiently.w ensure the uk is an attractive destination for overseas students, not least those who wish to study stem subjects (science, technology, engineering and maths). we will reinstate post-study work visas for stem graduates who can find graduate-level employment within six months of completing their degree.tourism and heritage collectively make up as much as 9% of our economy, and yet these industries do not have the status they deserve in government or in wider society. we will work to make sure the british tourism industry is able to compete with other major world destinations and be a key generator of growth in the uk economy.we will:w strengthenthehospitalityandtourismcouncil,withthebusiness and culture secretaries as co-chairs.w give higher status to tourism within the department for culture, media and sport.w build on our successful tourism north and tourism south west initiatives to devolve more power, resources and decision-making to local areas to promote their unique tourism propositions in the uk and globally.2.8 securing global leadership in technologythe uk has a competitive advantage in key sectors of the modern economy that have the capacity to transform our lives. the uks digital sector is growing at a rate of over 10% a year, employing nearly 1.5m people. 15% of all new companies last year were digital companies. we need to support this important sector of our economy. we will:352prosperity for all | building a sustainable economy36w completetherolloutofhigh-speedbroadband,toreachalmost every household (99.9%) in the uk as well as small businesses in both rural and urban areas.w build on the success of tech city, tech north and the cambridge tech cluster with a network across the uk acting as incubators for technology companies.w support fast-growing businesses that could create a million jobs over 20 years, following the sherry coutu report into these scale- ups.w promote the take up of stem subjects in schools, retain coding on the national curriculum and encourage entrepreneurship at all levels.w maintainanddeveloptheaward-winninggovernmentdigital service, and the principle of digital by default in public services, pressing ahead with plans to extend this to local government.w continue to release government data sets that can facilitate economic growth in an open and accessible format, including on standards in public services.liberal democrat manifesto 2015w ensure the technology implications of government activity are properly considered by introducing technology impact assessments into the policy design process.w developcutting-edgedigitalskillscoursesforyoungpeople and the unemployed, working with private sector employers and education and training providers.2.9 pride in creativityliberal democrats understand that arts, creative industries and culture are crucial to britains success and essential for personal fulfilment and quality of life. the uks creative sector has been one of the great success stories of the past five years, and a critical driver of our recovery. we are proud of the arts in britain and will support them properly, working to deliver access for all, regardless of income, ethnicity, gender, age, belief, sexuality or disability. we believe the arts have an essential role in our education system and will work to encourage creativity in our schools and universities.we will:w maintain free access to national museums and galleries, while giving these institutions greater autonomy.w protect the independence of the bbc while ensuring the licence fee does not rise faster than inflation, maintain channel4 in public ownership and protect the funding and editorial independence of welsh language broadcasters.w support growth in the creative industries, including video gaming, by continuing to support the creative industries council, promoting creative skills, supporting modern and flexible patent, copyright and licensing rules, and addressing the barriers to finance faced by small creative businesses.372prosperity for all | building a sustainable economy38real help for family financestax, welfare,pensions andconsumer rightsa fair society is one in which everyone has the means to get by and the chance to get on. we will continue to rebalance the tax system away from hard work and towards unearned wealth, while stamping out abusive tax avoidance.3we will increase availability of childcare to help parents who want to work. we will continue to reform welfare and get people the right support in jobcentres. we will build on our world-leading reforms to the pensions system. and we will fight tirelessly for a better deal for consumers, in the private and public sectors.3940liberal democrats believe britain should be more equal, and have worked in government to cut taxes for people on low and middle incomes, putting money back in the pockets of millions of people. we have improved childcare support, reformed benefits to make sure work pays and improved back-to-work support. and we have freed up pension savings to give older people more choice about how to manage their money in retirement.we will continue to rebalance the tax system away from hard work and towards unearned wealth, while stamping out abusive tax avoidance. we will increase availability of childcare to help parents who want to work. we will continue to reform welfare and get people the right support in jobcentres. we will build on our world-leading reforms to the pensions system. and we will fight tirelessly for a better deal for consumers, in the private and public sectors.liberal democrat manifesto 2015a record of deliverya promise of moreraise the personal allowance to at least 12,500, cutting your taxes by around 400 morean 800 tax cut for low and middle income earners, delivered by letting you earn 10,600 tax freesecured the biggest ever cash rise in the state pension with our triple lock policy on upratingcut the cost of childcare with more free hours for three and four-year olds, and help for disadvantaged two- year olds too.helped people balance work and family life with shared parental leave and the right to request flexible working for allkept welfare spending under control, while blocking plans to cut off young peoples benefits3.1 fair taxeslegislate to make the triple lock permanent, guaranteeing decent pensions rises each yearextend free childcare to all two- year olds, and to the children of working families from the end of paid parental leaveexpand shared parental leave with a use it or lose it month for fathers, and introduce a right to paid leave for carersmake sure it pays to work by rolling out universal credit, and investin back-to-work and healthcare support for those who need itduring this parliament we have gone even further than our manifesto pledge to raise the personal income tax threshold to 10,000 a year. this aprils increase to 10,600 has lifted more than three million people out of income tax altogether and delivered a tax cut of more than 800 for millions of low and middle-income taxpayers.we will continue to make taxes fairer and simpler, help those on low and middle incomes, and ensure those on the highest incomes make a fair contribution.413real help for family finances | tax, welfare, pensions and consumer rights42w raise the tax-free personal allowance to at least 12,500 by the end of the next parliament, putting around 400 back in the pockets of millions of working people and pensioners. we will bring forward the planned increase to an 11,000 allowance to april 2016.w consider, as a next step, and once the personal allowance rise is delivered, raising the employee national insurance threshold to the income tax threshold, as resources allow, while protecting low earners ability to accrue pension and benefit entitlements.w ensure those with the highest incomes and wealth are makinga fair contribution. we have identified a series of distortions, loopholes and excess reliefs that should be removed, raising money to contribute to deficit reduction. these include reforms to capital gains tax and dividend tax relief, refocusing entrepreneurs relief and a supplementary corporation tax for the banking sector. in addition, we will introduce a uk-wide high value property levy on residential properties worth over2 million. it will have a banded structure, like council tax.w take tough action against corporate tax evasion and avoidance,including by: setting a target for hm revenue and customs to reducethe tax gap and continuing to invest in staff to enable themto meet it. introducing a general anti-avoidance rule which wouldoutlaw contrived structures designed purely or largely toavoid tax. implementing the planned new offence of corporatefailure to prevent economic crime, including tax evasion, with penalties for directors up to and including custodial sentences. levying penalties on firms proven to facilitate tax evasion, equivalent to the amount of tax evaded by their clients. asking the bank of englands financial policy committeeto consider the approach to paying tax taken by banks for themselves, their employees and for their customers, as part of their assessment of the risks posed by the sector, supported by an annual report by hmrc.w restrict access to non-domiciled status, increasing the charges paid to adopt this status and ending the ability to inherit it.3.2 help with childcare costsmany parents want to take significant time out from work to care for young children but in many families both parents want or have towe will:liberal democrat manifesto 2015work, and the costs of childcare are prohibitive.we have made dramatic improvements over the currentparliament  with tax-free childcare, increases in childcare support through the benefit system and more free childcare hours for two, three and four-year olds. but we need to do more so that all who want to work can do so.we will:w commit to an ambitious goal of 20 hours free childcare a week for all parents with children aged from two to four-years, and all working parents from the end of paid parental leave (nine months) to two years. this will not only help parents afford to work, it will help all children start school confident, happy and ready to learn.w start by providing 15 hours a week of free childcare to the parents of all two-year olds. we will then prioritise 15 hours free childcare for all working parents with children aged between nine months and two years.w complete the introduction of tax-free childcare, which will provide up to 2,000 of childcare support for each child and include childcare support in universal credit, refunding 85% of childcare costs so work pays for low earners.3.3 creating jobs and helping people find workmore people are working in the uk today than ever before. our economic plans have created more jobs than anyone forecast. but that does not make it easy for everyone to find work. liberal democrats inherited a benefit system that trapped millions on out- of-work benefits, because it simply did not pay to be in work. our reforms are starting to change that but we need to go further.we will:w complete the introduction of universal credit (uc), so people are always better off in work. we will review uc to address any issues regarding cliff edges, and ensure increased working hours are properly incentivised for all claimants. we will retain the overall cap on a households benefits and believe this should continue to be set at around the average family income.w deliver a reformed and improved work programme in partnership with english local government, and the national governmentsof wales, scotland and northern ireland. by devolving this support we can ensure help and training are more tailored to local employment markets and better integrated with other services. we will improve incentives for jobcentre staff and433real help for family finances | tax, welfare, pensions and consumer rights44work programme providers to ensure there is real help for thosefurthest from the labour market.w establish a review of effective ways to promote rainy day savingto improve peoples financial resilience, and reform hardship payments, making it easier for people to bring forward part of their benefit payments to deal with emergencies.w develop a package of specialist support for carers seeking part- time work or a return to full-time employment.w review sanctions procedures in jobcentres. while sanctionscan be a necessary last resort to ensure jobseekers are looking for work, they should not be used to cut benefit expenditure deliberately. reductions in benefits may not always be the best way to improve claimants compliance: those with chaotic lives might be more successful in finding a job if they were directed to targeted support with their problems. we will ensure there are no league tables or targets for sanctions issued by jobcentres and introduce a yellow card warning so people are only sanctioned if they deliberately and repeatedly break the rules.liberal democrats will protect young peoples entitlements to the welfare safety net, while getting them the help they need to get their first job. that means doubling the number of businesses that hire apprentices. it also means providing support that has been proven to work, like work experience placements that help them get a first foot on the career ladder. these placements should be tailored for those with disabilities or mental health problems and those with parental responsibilities and we will work to expand the availability of placements into new sectors including manufacturing, science and technology.3.4 making welfare workworking-age benefits make up a significant proportion of public spending, and have long been in need of reform, which we have started in this parliament. through tough choices, we have found savings in the welfare budget and we must continue to do so as we balance the books. however, we do not support proposals for a lengthy freeze to working age benefits, and we will not protect benefits for the wealthiest pensioners at the expense of people working on low wages.our priority is to tackle the causes of rising benefit bills  high rents, low pay, sickness and unemployment.we will:w introduce a 1% cap on the uprating of working-age benefits untilliberal democrat manifesto 20153real help for family finances | tax, welfare, pensions and consumer rightsthe budget is balanced in 2017/18, after which they will rise with inflation once again. disability and parental leave benefits will be exempt from this temporary cap.w encouragelandlordstolowertheirrentbypayingthemhousing benefit directly, with tenants consent, in return for a fixed reduction. our plans for a major expansion of house building and new family friendly tenancies, which limit annual rent increases, will also help reduce upward pressure on rents. we will review the way the shared accommodation rate in local housing allowance is set, and review the broad rental market areas to ensure they fit with realistic travel patterns.w improve links between jobcentres and work programme providers and the local nhs to ensure all those in receipt of health-related benefits are getting the care and support to which they are entitled. in particular, as we expand access to talking therapies we expect many more people to recover and be able to seek work again.w work with local authorities to tackle fraud and error in a more45income tax personal allowance12,000 11,000 10,0009,000 8,000 7,000 6,000 5,00012,5002009201020112012201320142015next parliamentcoordinated way, in particular on housing benefit.w help everyone in work on a low wage step up the careerladder and increase their hours, reducing their need forbenefits, with tailored in-work careers and job search advice. w withdraw eligibility for the winter fuel payment and freetv licence from pensioners who pay tax at the higher rate (40%). we will retain the free bus pass for all pensioners.3.5 flexibility at work and fair paybritains employment laws are among the best in the world, balancing the needs of business for flexibility with the rights of staff to fair treatment. nonetheless there are still too many examples of low pay, exploitation, and bad practice, which contribute to unacceptable levels of inequality in our society. this has to change: the more people earn a decent wage, the fewer will be dependent on benefits or stuck in poverty.we will:w encourageemployerstoprovidemoreflexibleworking, expanding shared parental leave with an additional use it or lose it month to encourage fathers to take time off with young children. while changes to parental leave shouldbe introduced slowly to give business time to adjust, our ambition is to see paternity and shared parental leave become a day one right.w ensure swift implementation of the new rules requiring companies with more than 250 employees to publish details of the different pay levels of men and women in their organisation. we will build on this platform and, by 2020, extend transparency requirements to include publishing the number of people paid less than the living wage and the ratio between top and median pay. we will also consult on requirements for companies to conduct and publish a full equality pay review, and to consult staff on executive pay.w ask the low pay commission to look at ways of raising the national minimum wage, without damaging employment opportunities. we will improve enforcement action and clamp down on abuses by employers seeking to avoid payingthe minimum wage by reviewing practices such as unpaidinternships.w establish an independent review to consult on how to set afair living wage across all sectors. we will pay this living wage in all central government departments and their agencies from april 2016, and encourage other public sector473real help for family finances | tax, welfare, pensions and consumer rights48employers to do likewise.w improvetheenforcementofemploymentrights,reviewingemployment tribunal fees to ensure they are not a barrier. we will ensure employers cannot avoid giving their staff rights or paying the minimum wage by wrongly classifying them as workers or self-employed.liberal democrats understand that flexible employment contracts  including zero hours contracts  can work well for employees and businesses. but that is not always the case and we will continueto stamp out abuse. we will create a formal right to request a fixed contract and consult on introducing a right to make regular patterns of work contractual after a period of time.3.6 improving support for the hardest to helpfor too long, sickness benefits were used as a way of parking people away from the unemployment statistics. our aim is toget everyone the support and help they need, both financially and in terms of advice and support. that does require a formal assessment: but these tests have to be fair and should not be an extra burden for vulnerable people. that is why we have made many improvements to the assessments introduced by the last government.we want to aim even higher, ensuring assessments are truly fair, with quick access to financial help for those who cannot work, and support for those who can.we will:w conduct a review of the work capability assessment and personal independence payment assessments to ensure they are fair, accurate and timely and evaluate the merits of a public sector provider.w invest to clear any backlog in assessments for disability living allowance and personal independence payment.w simplify and streamline back-to-work support for people with disabilities, mental or physical health problems. we will aim for the goal of one assessment and one budget for disabled and sick people to give them more choice and control.w raise awareness of, and seek to expand, access to work, which supports people with disabilities in work.w reform the policy to remove the spare room subsidy. existing social tenants will not be subject to any housing benefit reduction until they have been offered reasonable alternative accommodation. we will ensure tenants who need an extraliberal democrat manifesto 2015bedroom for genuine medical reasons are entitled to one in any assessment of their housing benefit needs, and those whose homes are substantially adapted do not have their housing benefit reduced.3.7 help to save for and enjoy your retirementlife expectancy is increasing. this is obviously good news, but it brings challenges; older people may need a pension income that will last for 20, 30 or even 40 years.we want to build on the world-leading reforms liberal democrats in government have introduced since 2010. we have abolished the default retirement ages so older people cannot be forced out of work on grounds of age. we have reversed decades of decline in pensioner incomes by uprating the state pension in line with our triple lock guarantee. we have introduced a new single tier pension to make saving simple. we have auto-enrolled five million people into a pension for the first time. and we have scrapped the rules that dictated how you receive your pension, so now you can spend your savings as you see fit.we want britain to be the best place in the world to save for, and enjoy, your retirement.we will:w continue the introduction of our simpler single tier pension so people can plan ahead securely, and feel the benefit of every pound they save.w legislate for the liberal democrat triple lock of increasing the state pension each year by the highest of earnings growth, prices growth or 2.5%.w ensure pensioners are eligible to gain from the increased personal allowance of 12,500.w improve workplace pensions and continue to auto-enrol workers, completing the rollout of this scheme in full and on time. we will crack down on charges and encourage people to save more into their pension pot through this scheme.w press ahead with plans to allow people more freedom in the use of their pension pots and to allow existing pensioners to sell their annuity.w establish a review to consider the case for, and practical implications of, introducing a single rate of tax relief for pensions, which would be designed to be simpler and fairer and which would be set more generously than the current 20% basic rate relief.493real help for family finances | tax, welfare, pensions and consumer rights3.8 protecting consumers and keeping bills low50confident consumers encourage innovation and competition, which strengthen our economy. we have radically overhauled consumer rights law, making it simpler and clearer and for thefirst time protecting consumers buying digital content. we have driven competition in the energy sector, speeded up switching, and simplified tariffs so customers can always get the best deal. we have ended the era of above-inflation rail fare increases. we have clamped down on unscrupulous payday lenders and strengthened protections for vulnerable consumers against rogue traders. in the next parliament we want to go further.we will:w force energy companies to allow customers to change to any cheaper supplier in just 24 hours, and extend the principle of gainer led switching, where your new provider organises your switch for you, into new sectors, including telecoms.w give people easier to understand information about their own energy use, with appropriate privacy protections, with a national rollout of smart electricity and gas meters. we will guarantee that anyone on a prepayment meter can choose a smart meter instead by 2017.w help people form new energy cooperatives so they can benefit from group discounts and cut their bills.w protect high streets and consumers by granting new powersto local authorities to reduce the proliferation of betting shops and substantially reducing the maximum stakes for fixed odds betting terminals.w ensure rail fares rise no faster than inflation over the parliament as a whole.w require the sports ground safety authority to prepare guidance under which domestic football clubs, working with their supporters, may introduce safe standing areas.w continue and expand the midata project into new sectors, giving consumers the right to access data businesses hold on them in an open and reusable format.3.9 driving up standards in public servicescitizens expect a good service from their public services, and rightly so. while many schools, hospitals, libraries and other public institutions offer world-class standards, we could do so muchliberal democrat manifesto 2015better: integrating services and making them more accessible, as well as improving the response when things go wrong.liberal democrats value the important role the voluntary, independent and community sectors play in the life of our communities and in delivering public services. to ensure all providers of public services are accountable to their users and the public, a public authority (if possible a democratically accountable one) should always take the decision about whether a service should be provided or commissioned.we will:w improve consumer protections in public services, with a review of complaints handling processes, exploring the options of mirroring the private sector super-complaint system in the public sector and reforms to the current system of ombudsmen.w introduce a community trigger mechanism to enable the public to require a review of the provision of a particular service being delivered consistently poorly.w extend freedom of information laws to cover private companies delivering public services.w work with local authorities to bring services together at a local level to provide a better service to citizens, and support users in pooling their personal budgets into mutual support arrangements.w continue and expand the what works network to promote evidence-based policy making, establish an incubator for social enterprises developing innovative solutions to policy problems and expand the use of public competitions to encourage innovation in public services.w require the highest standards of data protection by public service providers, including requiring that where data is used for research purposes it must be anonymised wherever possible, and impose a moratorium on the creation of new government databases without parliamentary authority.513real help for family finances | tax, welfare, pensions and consumer rights52an opportunity societyworld-classeducation for all4liberal democrats have put education at the heart of our agenda for a generation. we believe every child deserves a great start in life, andare determined to make sure that the education system finds and nurtures the best in everyone. this is essential in order to break down the unfair divisions in our society, and to ensure a productive, competitive economy.5354liberal democrats have put education at the heart of our agenda for a generation. we believe every child deserves a great start in life, and are determined to make sure that the education system finds and nurtures the best in everyone. this is essential in order to break down the unfair divisions in our society, and to ensure a productive, competitive economy.too many people have their chances in life determined by who their parents are, rather than by their own efforts and abilities. with our pupil premium, investing in children who might otherwise fall behind, we are finally tackling the scandalous gap in exam results between rich and poor, but we must do even more.children start learning from the moment they are born, so parents need to be supported right from the start. our plan stretches from cradle to college: high-quality early years education; qualified teachers and successful schools in every community; more money helping the children who need it most; flexible choices for teenagers and young people; and world-class training at college and university to set every young adult on the path to a fulfilled working life.liberal democrat manifesto 2015a record of deliverya promise of moreprotect early years, school, sixth form and college budgets  investment from nursery to 19 to raise standards for allprotection for school budgets and new pupil premium cash for your local school to help children who might otherwise fall behinda million more children now taught in good or outstanding schoolsdriven up standards and narrowed the attainment gap between rich and poor childrenfree school meals for the youngest children in primary schooltwo million apprenticeships, training our young people for 21st century jobs, and record numbers going to universityparents guarantee: core curriculum in every school and every child taught by qualified teachersend illiteracy and innumeracy by 2025, with action in nurseries to get all 4 year olds ready for school by 2020extend free school meals to all primary pupilsdouble the numbers of businesses hiring apprentices, and give young people aged 1621 a discount bus pass to cut the cost of travel4.1 high-quality early years educationif we want a more equal society, we must get help to all those who might fall behind, and their parents, right from the start. that means improving early education and protecting the wide range of family support services offered in childrens centres. we must improve the quality of early years teaching, and raise the status of those who work in early years.we will:w raise the quality of early years provision and ensure that by 2020 every formal early years setting employs at least one person554an opportunity society | world class education for allimproving standards in schools6543215.7 million children in good or outstanding schools2010 2014under the liberal democrats the proportion of pupils in good and outstanding schools increased from 66% to 79%  that's a million more pupils getting a good education.56liberal democrat manifesto 2015millionswho holds an early years teacher qualification. working with organisations like teach first, we will recruit more staff with early years qualified status, and extend full qualified teacher status, terms and conditions to all those who are properly trained.w increase our early years pupil premium  which gives early years settings extra money to help children from disadvantaged backgrounds  to 1,000 per pupil per year.w continue to support local authorities in providing childrens centres, especially in areas of high need, encouraging integration with other community services like health visitors, and in particular reviewing the support and advice available for parents on early child nutrition and breastfeeding.w improve the identification of special educational needs and disability at the earliest possible stage, so targeted support can be provided and primary schools are better prepared for their intake of pupils.4.2 driving up school standardsthere is much to be proud of in our schools today, and much that has been improved in the last few years. but far too many children are still failing to get the qualifications they need. the gaps between rich and poor are still too wide. we cannot fail our children  especially when we know it is the children who need the most help who are the most likely to be let down.we will:w protecttheeducationbudgetinrealtermsfromtheearlyyearsto age 19. we will at least protect the schools pupil premium in real terms, consider carefully the merits of extending the premium, and introduce a fair national funding formula.w setaclearambitionforallchildrentoachieveagoodgraspofmaths and english, aiming to eradicate child illiteracy and innumeracy by 2025. we will set an interim goal that all children should start school with good language skills by 2020.w strengthenschoolleadershipandgovernance.wewillproviderapid support and intervention to help ensure that all schools become good or outstanding. our talented head teachers programme will expand, helping move top leaders to where they are most needed.w increasethenumberofteachingschoolscentresofteaching excellence that provide support to other schools.w ensurethereisaneffective,democraticallyaccountable,middletier to support and intervene in schools where problems are identified. we will encourage local head teachers with a strong record to playa key role in school improvement through a local head teacher574an opportunity society | world class education for all58board, working with schools and local authorities. we will abolishunelected regional schools commissioners.w allowofstedtoinspectbothlocalauthoritiesandacademychains.local authorities and academy chains which are failed by ofsted for intervention work will be required to work with stronger organisations or be replaced.w ruleoutstate-fundedprofit-makingschools.w givedemocraticallyaccountablelocalauthoritiesclearresponsibility for local school places planning. we will only fund new mainstream schools in areas where school places are needed, and repeal the rule that all new state funded schools must be free schools or academies. we will allow local authorities to select the school sponsor, where this is not the local authority itself.w ensureafairlocalschoolsadmissionsprocess.w implementthechildrenscommissionersreporttheygotheextramile into the prevention of and positive alternatives to exclusion, andstrengthen appeals panels.w extendfreeschoolmealstoallchildreninprimaryeducationasresources allow and following a full evaluation of free meals forinfants.w continuetopromotethelocalintegrationofhealth,careandeducational support for children with special educational needs and health problems.we will allow parents to continue to choose faith-based schools within the state-funded sector and allow the establishment of new faith schools. we will ensure all faith schools develop an inclusive admissions policy and end unfair discrimination on grounds of faith when recruiting staff, except for those principally responsible for optional religious instruction.4.3 world-class teachinggreat teachers are at the heart of a successful education system. we will continue our work to attract the best into the profession and support teachers throughout their careers.we want to build the status of the teaching profession, support and nurture teachers in their work, and so drive up standards in every school.we will:w guarantee all teachers in state-funded schools will be fully qualified or working towards qualified teacher status (qts) from september 2016.liberal democrat manifesto 2015w introduce a clear and properly funded entitlement to professional development for all teachers. we will raise the bar for entry tothe profession, requiring a b grade minimum in gcse maths and english, allowing us to abolish the separate maths and english tests.w help establish a new profession-led royal college of teachers, eventually to oversee qualified teacher status and professional development. we do not believe ministers should dictate teaching practice and will not issue instructions about how to structure the school day or what kind of lessons to conduct.w continue to support the teach first programme to attract high calibre graduates into teaching, in particular in stem subjects.w tackleunnecessaryteacherworkload,includingby: avoiding policy changes while children are within a keystage. establishing the right accountability framework for schools. ensuring ofsted inspections are high-quality, fair to allschools and focus on outcomes and not processes.w establish a new national leadership institute to promote high-quality leadership and help the best leaders into the mostchallenging schools.w continue to work with the education endowment foundationto establish a comprehensive evidence base on what works in teaching, including assessing play-based learning in early education, and tackling the attainment gap.we need to encourage and inspire more children to study stem subjects. at primary level we will encourage schools to have at least one science specialist among the staff, and at secondary level work to maximise the number of teachers who have degree qualifications in the subjects they teach.4.4 curriculum and qualificationswe want schools to have flexibility and freedom, but we also believe that both parents and children need to know that the school curriculum will cover the essentials, and that teachers will be skilled educators who know how to inspire a love of learning.that is why we have developed our parents guarantee: every child will be taught by qualified teachers, and the core curriculum will be taught at every state-funded school. we want the highest standards in our schools, and will ensure that every child has a thorough grasp of the basics. but we also understand that a great education is about more than just learning facts: creativity should be nurtured, children should be helped to develop the life skills they594an opportunity society | world class education for all60will need as adults, and every pupil should be given advice and guidance about their future.we will:w establish an independent educational standards authority (esa) entirely removed from ministerial interference. the esa will have responsibility for curriculum content and examination standards.w introduce a minimum curriculum entitlement  a slimmed down core national curriculum, which will be taught in all state-funded schools. this will include personal, social and health education: a curriculum for life including financial literacy, first aid and emergency lifesaving skills, citizenship, and age-appropriate sex and relationship education. to ensure all children learn about a wide range of religious and nonreligious world views, religious education will be included in the core curriculum; however we will give schools the freedom to set policy on whether to hold actsof collective worship, while ensuring any such acts are strictlyoptional.w complete the introduction of reformed gcses, while continuingto oppose conservative plans for a return to the old o-level/csedivide.w improve the quality of vocational education, including skills forentrepreneurship and self-employment, and improve careers advice in schools and colleges.4.5 improving care for looked after childrenliberal democrats have long championed early intervention to prevent problems before they arise, but we also need to make sure we equip social workers with the skills to address these complex issues and ensure childrens safety. where children do have to be taken into care we must make sure they find a loving home withas little disruption and instability as possible. we have done much in government to be proud of in helping children in care and to improve social work, but we can still go further.we will:w continue to invest in early intervention, further expanding the troubled families programme and building on the work of the early intervention foundation to spread evidence of what works.w expect local authorities to set out a clear purpose for the care system: to promote emotional wellbeing and resilience, provide a secure base on which children can be supported in their development and provide individually tailored help with recovery.liberal democrat manifesto 2015w raise the quality and profile of childrens social work, continuing and expanding the frontline programme  which is fast-tracking the brightest and best into the profession  to at least 300 graduate recruits each year.w tackle delay and instability in foster care, with better support and training for foster carers, including on mental health issues.w continue to make it easier for children in care to find a loving home, through the national adoption register and the new national gateway for adoption, a first point of contact for potential adopters.w prevent looked after children and young people being drawn into the criminal justice system unnecessarily by promoting restorative justice.4.6 improving support for young adultswe want young people to face the future with optimism and confidence. the education leaving age has now risen to 18, but as children grow, their independence grows too, and the support that education and youth services provide to them and their families needs to adapt. whether it is supporting people with the costs of travel to college or apprenticeships, or promoting positive images of young people by celebrating their successes: liberal democrats are on the side of the next generation.we will:w work to introduce a new young persons discount card, for young people aged 1621, giving a 2/3rds discount on bustravel, as resources allow. this will assist all bus users by helping maintain the viability of existing bus routes and making it easier to open new ones.w enablegovernmentdepartments,localcouncilsandprivate businesses to add discount offers to the young persons discount card.w review access to transport for students and apprentices in rural areas where no scheduled services may be available.w develop an nhs student guarantee, making it easier for students to get care and support while at university, particularly those with long-term health conditions or caring responsibilities.w promotesocialactionandvolunteeringatschool,collegeanduniversity and work to raise the status of youth work and youth workers.w improve links between employers and schools, encouraging all schools to participate in mentoring schemes and programmes that seek to raise aspiration like speakers for schools and614an opportunity society | world class education for allinspiring the future. in particular, we will seek to inspire more children and young people to follow technical and scientific careers through partnership with relevant businesses.4.7 a world class university sector, open to allliberal democrats have ensured that no undergraduate student in england has to pay a penny up front of their tuition fees. students in england do not have to pay anything until they are earning over 21,000 per year  a figure which will increase in line with earnings  and over that income, monthly repayments are linked to earnings. this means only high-earning graduates pay their tuition fees in full. we now have the highest university application rates ever, including from disadvantaged students.but we need to ensure higher education is accessible to all those who can benefit, including at postgraduate level. liberal democrats in government secured the first ever income-contingent loans scheme for graduate degrees, which we will protect and seek to extend.we will:w ensure that all universities work to widen participation across the sector, prioritising early intervention in schools and colleges. this will include running summer schools and setting up mentoring programmes between students or alumni and school pupils.w require universities to be transparent about their selection criteria.w work with university mission groups to develop a comprehensive credit accumulation and transfer framework to help students transfer between and within institutions, enable more part-time learning, and help more people to complete qualifications.w improve the key information set and explore the option ofa standardised student contract. we will legislate to reform regulation of the higher education sector, improving student protection.w establish a review of higher education finance within the next parliament to consider any necessary reforms, in the light of the latest evidence of the impact of the existing financing system on access, participation (including of low-income groups) and quality. the review will cover undergraduate and postgraduate courses, with an emphasis on support for living costs for students, especially from disadvantaged backgrounds.62liberal democrat manifesto 20154.8 expanding and improving apprenticeships and further educationmore people have started an apprenticeship in this parliament than ever before. as we grow our economy, we must protect and enhance adult skills training and our further education colleges. we need to grow our skill base, especially in the technologies and industries that are most important to our economic future. we want it to become the norm for businesses to take on and train up young people as apprentices in every sector of our economy, and for higher level apprenticeships to be understood as a respected alternative to university education.we will:w increase the number of apprenticeships and improve their quality, extending the apprenticeship grant for employers for the remainder of the next parliament, delivering 200,000 grants to employers and expanding the number of degree-equivalent higher apprenticeships.w aim to double the number of businesses which hire apprentices, including by extending them to new sectors of our economy, like creative and digital industries.w develop national colleges as national centres of expertise for key sectors, like renewable energy, to deliver the high-level vocational skills that businesses need.w establishacross-partycommissiontosecurealong-term settlement for the public funding of reskilling and lifelong learning.w set up a review into the vat treatment of sixth form colleges and fe colleges to ensure fair treatment in relation to the schools sector.w work with the apprenticeship advisory group to increase the number of apprentices from bame backgrounds, ensure gender balance across industry sectors, and encourage underrepresented groups to apply.w identify and seek to solve skills gaps like the lack of advanced technicians by expanding higher vocational training like foundation degrees, higher national diplomas, higher national certificates and higher apprenticeships.634an opportunity society | world class education for all64building a healthier societyprotecting thenhs and5improving healthgood health is one of the most important assets we can have in life, and we must do all we can to help people stay healthy, as well as provide high- quality care when they are ill. our nhs is the envy of the world, and we will fund it properly, ending the discrimination against mental health which has existed for too long, and delivering equal care.6566good health is one of the most important assets we can have in life, and we must do all we can to help people stay healthy, as well as provide high-quality care when they are ill.our nhs is the envy of the world, and we will fund it properly, ending the discrimination against mental health which has existed for too long, and delivering equal care.as a nation, we are living longer but that means we have more people living with conditions like cancer, diabetes and dementia who need care and support to live with dignity and the maximum degree of independence. we must set the highest standards in care, witha well-trained and motivated workforce, and get health and care services to work together without artificial boundaries.health and wellbeing are affected by far more than just the quality of health and care services. liberal democrats will act to ensure that everything government does supports people to improve their wellbeing: we will work to improve the wider factors that affect our health like warm homes, good air quality and access to healthy food so everyone can have the best opportunity to lead a healthy life.liberal democrat manifesto 2015a record of deliverya promise of moredeliver the 8 billion englands nhs leaders say is needed to keep it strong, with money for scotland, wales and northern ireland tooincreased the nhs budget every year in real terms, helping fund nearly 10,000 more doctors and 7,000 more nursesimproved access to talking therapies: 2.6 million patients have been treated since 2010400m invested to give carers a break with our respite fundcapped the cost of care, so older people can afford to get the help they need5.1 investing in our nhsinvest 500m to transform mental health care with waiting time standards to match those in physical health careintroduce a package of support for carers including a 250 carers bonus every yearcrack down on bad care, with better pay and conditions for care staff and higher standards for allthe nhs is our most treasured public service. liberal democrats are committed to the founding principles of the nhs as a taxpayer- funded system, free at the point of use. to ensure this principle is maintained even as demand for health care grows, we will give the nhs the investment it needs. we are the only party with a credible plan to deliver the extra 8 billion nhs leaders know our health service in england needs by 2020, with the appropriate boost to funding for scotland, wales and northern ireland too.we will:w always ensure access to health care is based on need not ability to pay and that the nhs remains free at the point of delivery.w deliver the money needed for englands nhs by: continuing real-terms protection of the nhs budget until675building a healthier society | protecting the nhs and improving healthwe have balanced the books in 2017/18  with a 1 billion boost on top of this protection. we made a start towards this 1 billion increase in the budget by securing a 250m a year investment in mental health. increasing nhs spending in line with economic growth from then on.w these commitments mean nhs funding in england will be at least 8 billion higher a year in real terms by 2020. this will lead to higher funding for the scottish, welsh and northern irish governments, too, which liberal democrats believe should be spent on their health services.w invest half the initial 1 billion in providing care in peoples own homes and communities, preventing emergency admissions and making it easier to discharge people after a hospital stay  and so relieving pressures on all hospital services.w make sure the nhs is funded and organised to carry out diagnostic tests and necessary treatments in a timely and effective manner, so that waiting times meet public expectations without distorting clinical priorities.w join up health and care at national level, shifting full responsibility for care policy and funding to the department of health.to ensure the nhs is safeguarded for the long term we will commission a non-partisan fundamental review of nhs and social care funding this year. we will involve as many people as possible in this nationwide consultation.5.2 equal care for mental healthone in four of us will experience mental health problems, but for decades mental health has been the last in the queue for funding and attention. mental health problems cost the country as much as 100 billion each year yet less than a quarter of people with depression get the treatment they need.in 2012, we called a halt to this and wrote equality for mental health into law. we are now making real progress, introducing the first ever waiting time standards in mental health. we have invested 400m in increasing access to talking therapies and 150m in help for people with eating disorders, but there is still a long way to go. that is why we will increase mental health spending in englands nhs by 500m a year by 2016/17  half of which we delivered in this years budget  and provide the cash for similar investments in scotland, wales and northern ireland.68liberal democrat manifesto 20155building a healthier society | protecting the nhs and improving healthto deliver genuine equality between mental and physical health in the nhs we will:w continue to roll out access and waiting time standards for children, young people and adults. this will include a waiting time standard from referral of no more than six weeks for therapy for depression or anxiety and a two-week wait standard for all young people experiencing a first episode of psychosis.w increase access to clinically and cost-effective talking therapies so hundreds of thousands more people can get this support. our long-term goal is to see everyone who can benefit being treated, but we will set an interim target of getting 25% of those suffering into treatment.w transform care for pregnant women, new mothers and those who have experienced miscarriage or stillbirth, and help them get the early care they need.w revolutionise childrens mental health services. with the 250m a year announced in this years budget we will implement the proposals outlined in the report of the governments childrens mental health taskforce. this means building better links with schools, ensuring all children develop mental resilience, and getting support and care quickly to those who are struggling. our investment will help ensure children can access high-quality care closer to home.69mental health70liberal democrat manifesto 2015w ensure no one in crisis is turned away, with new waiting time standards and better crisis care in accident and emergency (a&e), in the community and via phone lines. this will enable us to end the use of police cells for people facing a mental health crisis.w radically transform mental health services, extending the use of personal budgets, integrating care more fully with the rest of the nhs, introducing rigorous inspection and high-quality standards, comprehensive collection of data to monitor outcomes and waiting times and changing the way services are funded so they do not lose out in funding decisions in future.w introduce care navigators so people get help finding their way around the system, and set stretching standards to improve the physical health of people with mental health problems.to improve wellbeing and make the uk more mental health-friendly, we will:w publish a national wellbeing strategy, which puts better health and wellbeing for all at the heart of government policy. this will cover all aspects of government policy, including transport, access to nature, and housing, at national and local level.w develop a clear approach on preventing mental illness, with a public health campaign promoting the steps people can take to improve their own mental resilience  the wellbeing equivalent of the five a day campaign.w support good practice among employers in promoting wellbeing and ensure people with mental health problems get the help they need to stay in or find work.w establish a world-leading mental health research fund, investing 50m to further our understanding of mental illness and develop more effective treatments.w continue to support the time to change programme to tackle stigma against mental health.w ensureallfrontlinepublicserviceprofessionals,includingin schools and universities, get better training in mental health helping them to develop their own mental resilience as well as learning to identify people with mental health problems.w support community services and volunteers working to combat loneliness, particularly in later life.5.3 joining up health and social carewe need services that fit around peoples lives, not ones that force them to fit their lives around the care they need. this is going to be increasingly important as our population ages and the number of715building a healthier society | protecting the nhs and improving health72liberal democrat manifesto 2015people living with long-term conditions continues to grow. it is time to move away from a fragmented system to an integrated service with more joined-up care, and more personal budgets so people can design services for their own individual needs. we believethis should happen from the bottom up, suiting the needs of local communities.we will:w secure local agreement on full pooling of budgets between the nhs and care services with a target date of 2018, consulting on a legal duty for this. the details of how services are commissioned will remain a matter for local areas. in this way we will build on the radical proposals to integrate health and care funding in greater manchester.w continue to develop health and wellbeing boards to take a broad view of how services can improve wellbeing in their area, ensuring democratic accountability for local care.w combine the public health, adult social care and health outcome frameworks into a single national wellbeing outcomes framework to ensure the nhs and local government work together towards common goals.w support new joined-up services such as gps providing services like scans and blood tests closer to home, or hospitals having gp surgeries within a&e departments.w encouragethedevelopmentofjoined-uphealthproviders, which cover hospital and community services, including gps, learning from international best practice. we will permit nhs commissioners and providers in a local area to form a single integrated health organisation where appropriate.w work with monitor to reform nhs funding systems, moving away from payments for activity to tariffs that encourage joined-up services and preventive care.liberal democrats are committed to repealing any parts of the health and social care act 2012 which make nhs services vulnerable to forced privatisation through international agreements on free marketsin goods and services. we will end the role of the competition and markets authority in health, making it clear that the needs of patients, fairness and access always come ahead of competition, and thatgood local nhs services do not have to be put out to tender. after determined negotiations, we now have a clear guarantee from the eu that member states rights to provide public services directly and not open them up to competition are explicitly enshrined in the transatlantic trade and investment partnership (ttip), and we will ensure this remains the case for ttip and any future trade agreements.735building a healthier society | protecting the nhs and improving health745.4 better access to gps and community caremost peoples experience of the nhs is their local gp, or the nurses and support staff who visit them at home or work in community clinics. better access to care in gp surgeries and closer to home is better for patients and will also help reduce pressure on hospitals, a&e departments and ambulances.we will:w ensure easier access to gps, expanding evening and weekend opening, encouraging phone and skype appointments, encouraging gps to work together in federations, and allowing people more choice.w encourage gps and other community clinicians to work in disadvantaged areas though our patient premium.w better utilise the network of community pharmacists across the country so they become the first point of contact for advice on minor illnesses and are joined-up with gps and community health teams.w encourage health services to link up with local authority social care teams and voluntary services to join up care.w review the rules for exemption from prescription charges to ensure they are fair to those with long-term conditions and disabilities.5.5 aiming higher: following the evidence to improve health and carewe will set ambitious goals so everything we do in the nhs is focused on helping people in britain live longer, healthier, lives. early diagnosis is absolutely crucial and can make a life-saving difference, so we will support screening programmes where these are proven to be both clinically and cost-effective. it is also vital we invest in research to develop new treatments and find new ways of delivering innovative treatments in affordable ways.we will:w setambitiousgoalstoimproveoutcomesforthemostserious life-threatening diseases like cancer and long-term conditions like dementia.w worktowardsaglobaldealtoreleasesignificantadditionalfundsfor finding a cure or preventive treatment for dementia, doubling nhsliberal democrat manifesto 2015research spend for this condition by 2020.w setcleargoalsforearlierdiagnosisandimprovedaftercareforconditions like cancer and heart disease.w promoteevidence-basedsocialprescribingofsport,artsandotheractivity to help tackle obesity, mental health problems and otherhealth conditions, and work to widen the evidence base.w continuetointroduceevidence-basedscreeningprogrammes,encouraging increased participation with informed consent.w improvepatientsafetybyupdatingthelawsonregulationofhealthprofessionals and on cosmetic procedures.w ensuretargetsinthenhsareevidence-basedanddonotdistortclinical priorities.w improvesupportforgroupsthatoftenfacelowerstandardsofcare,such as older people and people with mental health problems orlearning disabilities.w getthebestforthenhsoutofinnovativemedicinesandtreatmentswhile continuing to ensure value for money for the nhs in negotiations on the cost of medicines, promoting the use of generic medicines where appropriate.w support,includingthroughrulesonpublicfundingandresearch, moves towards ensuring all clinical trials are registered, with their methods and summary results reported in public.we will develop a just settlement for haemophiliacs who were given contaminated blood, and their families.5.6 helping people keep healthyit is better for patients and for the nhs if we keep people healthy in the first place, rather than just waiting until people develop illnesses and come for treatment. this means doing more to promote healthy eating and exercise, making people aware of the dangers of smoking and excessive consumption of alcohol and other drugs, and helping to improve mental health and wellbeing.in government we have taken significant steps, taking tobacco off display in shops and introducing standardised packaging,for example. we have also returned the delivery of public health services to local authorities to ensure a more coordinated and localised approach.improving our environment is a vital step to improving peoples health. by insulating homes we can reduce the number of people who become unwell because of the cold; by tackling air pollution we can attack the root causes of many deaths; by opening up more sports facilities and building more cycle routes we can cut obesity and reduce heart problems.755building a healthier society | protecting the nhs and improving health76w supporteffectivepublicawarenesscampaignslikebeclearon cancer, working closely with charities to raise awareness of the signs and symptoms of killer diseases.w keeppublichealthwithinlocalgovernment,whereitiseffectively joined-up with preventive community services.w restrictthemarketingofjunkfoodtochildren,includingrestricting tv advertising before the 9pm watershed, and maintain the effective five a day campaign.w encouragethetrafficlightlabellingsystemforfoodproductsand publication of information on calorie, fat, sugar and salt content in restaurants and takeaways.w reducesmokingrates,includingbycompletingtheintroductionof standardised packaging for tobacco products. we will introducea tax levy on tobacco companies so they fairly contribute to the costs of health care and smoking cessation services, subject to consultation on the detailed design and practicalities.w carefullymonitorthegrowingevidencebasearoundelectronic cigarettes, which appear to be a route by which many people are quitting tobacco, and ensure restrictions on marketing and useare proportionate and evidence-based. for example, we support restrictions on advertising which risks promoting tobacco or targets under 18s, such as those introduced in 2014, but would rule out a statutory ban on vaping in public places.w introduceminimumunitpricingforalcohol,subjecttotheoutcome of the legal challenge in scotland, and support the greater useof local authority powers and criminal behaviour orders to help communities tackle alcohol-related crime and disorder.w passanatureacttoincreaseaccesstogreenspacesandagreen transport act to cut air pollution.5.7 help for carersthe number of family carers is rising, including in the sandwich generation who find themselves trying to care for their children and their parents at the same time. carers are unsung heroes and we need to do more to help them. we have already invested 400m in carers breaks, but we can and must go further.we will:w introduce an annual carers bonus of 250 for carers looking after someone for 35 hours or more each week.w work to raise the amount you can earn before losing carers allowance from 110 to 150 a week.we will:liberal democrat manifesto 2015w consult on introducing five days paid additional care leave a year for carers who qualify for the carers allowance.w give the nhs a legal duty to identify carers and develop a carers passport scheme to inform carers of their rights in the nhs, like more flexible visiting hours, assert their role as expert partners in care and gain access to support.5.8 improving social carealthough we want to support people to remain independent as long as possible, many people will eventually need to rely on the care system. liberal democrats fought hard to secure the cap on the cost of care that will be introduced in 2017, but the quality of care is vital too.we have introduced rigorous new inspections under the chief inspector of social care and new guidance to end the use of fifteen- minute visits. we will end care cramming, which turns care workers into clockwatchers rushing between jobs. we are clamping down on care workers being paid less than the national minimum wage by resourcing and directing hmrc to pursue and prosecute providers who exploit their staff.we will:w finish the job of implementing the dilnot report proposals for a cap on the cost of social care.w provide more choice at the end of life, and free end-of-life social care for those placed on their local end-of-life register if evidence shows it is affordable and cost effective.w ask the care quality commission to showcase examples of good and bad practice in care commissioning by councils.w raise the professional status and training of care home managers through statutory licensing.w ensure those who work in the care sector are properly trained and suitable to practice by introducing a statutory code of conduct backed up by a care workers suitability register.w work with local government and providers to promote paying a living wage.775building a healthier society | protecting the nhs and improving health78better places to livecommunities, farming and the natural environment6liberal democrats are the only major party that takes seriously the responsibility of protecting our natural environment. we believe it is vital to make sure everyone has access to clean water, clean air and green spaces. we want to hand our countryside and green spaces on to the next generation in a better condition than when we were children.7980liberal democrats are the only major party that takes seriously the responsibility of protecting our natural environment. we believe it is vital to make sure everyone has access to clean water, clean air and green spaces. we want to hand our countryside and green spaces on to the next generation in a better condition than when we were children. that is why we have consistently defended the natural environment in government, bringing forward plans for a5p charge for plastic bags, planting a million extra trees in england and ensuring natural england remains a strong and independent organisation able to speak up for nature. we have fought to protect the green belt and areas of outstanding natural beauty, and we have increased public access to our coastal paths.liberal democrats are proud to represent a large part of rural britain and many farming constituencies. we believe a fair societyis one where people can afford to work and live in the countryside, and where farmers get the support they need. we want them to have a prosperous, sustainable future, and help them cope withthe challenges facing them, from floods to animal diseases. that is why we introduced the groceries code adjudicator to ensure large supermarkets treat their suppliers lawfully and fairly. we have spent 3.2 billion on flood management and defences over the course of this parliament. liberal democrats have kept farming and the natural environment at the top of the agenda over the past five years. we will ensure it remains a priority in the next parliament.liberal democrat manifesto 2015a record of deliverya promise of moreexpand accessible green space with new national nature parks chosen by local communities, and plant a tree for every child bornplanted a million trees and protected our national forests by blocking plans to sell them offintroduced a 5p charge on throwaway plastic bags to reduce waste500m investment package to promote ultra low emission vehicles which will cut emissions and improve air qualityhalted the post office closure programme and brought broadband to 80% of homes.6.1 protecting naturedrive up recycling to 70% of household waste and minimise landfillsave lives by cleaning up our air, with low emission zones in towns with a pollution problemcomplete broadband rolloutto every home, and create an innovation fund to help keep local gps, post offices and libraries openbritains natural environment is precious. without our green spaces, we would live less satisfying lives; they are critical to health, wellbeing and our sense of community. even in cash terms, short- term profits from exploiting the environment carry a longer-term penalty in squandered resources, clear-up costs and the impact on health.we will ensure that protecting the natural environment becomes a core commitment of every government department and agency.we will:w pass a nature act to put the natural capital committee (ncc) on a statutory footing, set natural capital targets, includingon biodiversity, clean air and water, and empower the ncc to recommend actions to meet these targets.w significantlyincreasetheamountofaccessiblegreenspace.816better places to live | communities, farming and the natural environment82we will complete the coastal path, introduce a fuller right to roam and a new designation of national nature parks to protect up to a million acres of accessible green space valued by local communities.w place the management of public forests on a sustainable footing, in line with the recommendations of the independent panel on forestry, and plant at least an additional tree for every child born  about 750,000 every year  as part of a major afforestation plan.w tackle wildlife and environmental crime with increased enforcement of environmental regulations by all relevant authorities and higher penalties to ensure environmental crime is not a financial risk worth taking.w improve uk enforcement of the eu birds and habitats directive. w bring forward a package of measures to protect bees and otherpollinators, including legal protection for bumblebee nests.w designate an ecologically coherent network of marine protectedareas with appropriate management by 2020.w encourage the uptake of water metering, including introducingmetering in all defined water-stressed areas by 2025, coupled with the development of national social tariffs to protect low- income households.liberal democrats believe in the highest standards of animal welfare. we will review the rules surrounding the sale of pets to ensure they promote responsible breeding and sales and minimise the use of animals in scientific experimentation, including by funding research into alternatives. we remain committed to the three rs of humane animal research: replace, reduce, refine.6.2 waste not, want not: using our resources to generate lasting prosperitythe successful economies of the future will be circular - where waste and the use of non-renewable resources are minimised and recovery, reuse and recycling are maximised. britain has a real opportunity to lead the way, generating sustainable prosperity and jobs.we will bring forward a comprehensive waste strategy to build a thriving reuse and recycling industry and pass a resource efficiency and zero waste act to:w taskthenaturalcapitalcommitteewithproducingasternreport on resource use, identifying resources being used unsustainably and recommending legally binding targets for reducing their net consumption.w useregulationbothnationallyandintheeutopromotesustainableliberal democrat manifesto 2015design where reparability, reuse and recyclability are prioritised, andto reduce packaging waste.w establishacoherenttaxandregulatoryframeworkforlandfill,incineration and waste collection to drive continuous increases in reuse and recycling rates and ensure only non-recyclable wasteis incinerated, including reinstating the landfill tax escalator and extending it to the lower rate and consulting on the introduction of an incineration tax.w commissionthenaturalcapitalcommitteetoinvestigatethe potential for other resource taxes, including deposit refund schemes.w establishastatutorywasterecyclingtargetof70%inengland. w encouragethegrowthofanaerobicdigestiontoproducebiogasfor heat and transport, and sustainable fertiliser, working with local authorities to extend separate food waste collections to at least 90% of homes by 2020.6.3 food and farmingour farmers do an essential job putting food on our tables and enhancing the natural environment, but food policy has been neglected for too long. we will encourage investment, growth, innovation and new entrants, securing the future of the uk food and farming industry.liberal democrats want continued reform of the common agricultural policy, eliminating the remaining production and export subsidies and supporting the development of environmentally sustainable solutions to growing demand for food.we will:w ensure farming support is concentrated on sustainable food production, conservation and tackling climate change, shifting cap payments to the active farmer rather than the landowner.w introduce a national food strategy to promote the production and consumption of healthy, sustainable and affordable food. our strategy will increase the use of locally and sustainably sourced, healthy and seasonal food, including in public institutions like schools and the nhs, implementing and expanding defras plan for public procurement.w work at eu level to ensure clear and unambiguous country of origin labelling on meat, meat products, milk and dairy products.w continuetosupportthegroceriescodeadjudicator.wewillallow the adjudicator to use discretion when holding a supermarket responsible for the treatment of suppliers so they can help ensure farmers get a fair price. this will help all suppliers, including in the dairy industry, which is under particular pressure.836better places to live | communities, farming and the natural environment84w ensure the food standards agency is adequately resourced to enforce food safety standards, and strengthen food fraud surveillance.w help farmers and growers compete internationally by continuing to reduce the administrative and regulatory burden and developing an animal disease strategy to reduce the risks and costs of animal disease.w continue to improve standards of animal welfare, building on britains leadership. we will review the use of cages, crates and routine preventive antibiotics.w introduce effective, science-led ways of controlling bovine tb, including by investing to produce workable vaccines, in line with the tb eradication strategy. we will only support extending the existing cull pilots if they are shown to be effective, humane and safe.w fully implement recent reforms of the common fisheries policy, working with industry and others to develop a national plan for sustainable uk fisheries, with fair treatment for the inshore small boat fleet.6.4 adapting to climate changethe devastating floods experienced over the past few years area sign of accelerating climate change, exacerbated by changing patterns of land use. we need to find better ways of adapting to storms, gales, flooding and heat waves that put increased pressure on infrastructure, water supplies and ecosystems.we will:w prepare a national resilience plan to help the uk economy, national infrastructure and natural resources adapt to the likely impacts of a 3-4 degree global average temperature rise.w work with local government to review the governance of flood risk and land drainage, including the role of internal drainage boards, and introduce high standards for flood resilience for buildings and infrastructure in flood risk areas.w set up a commission to research back-to-nature flood prevention schemes, including the role of habitats such as upland bogsand moors, woodlands, wetlands and species-rich grasslands in absorbing and holding water.w implement programmes to help farmers and other land users adapt to climate change impacts including protecting soil and forest carbon sinks, encouraging planting in uplands and restoring flood plains.w review the system of approvals required by landowners to repairliberal democrat manifesto 201585planting a new tree for every child born1 million trees planted2010  20153.75 million planted2015  202086liberal democrat manifesto 2015existing flood protection measures on their land.w increase the uptake of sustainable urban drainage systems tomaximise value for money for the taxpayer. we will consult on thebest ways to finance this.w update construction and planning standards to futureproofbuildings against higher summer temperatures.6.5 air quality and greener transportpoor air quality is a significant health problem. after smoking, estimates suggest it is britains second biggest public health challenge, responsible for the equivalent of 29,000 deaths every year. we will pass a green transport act, including a national plan to improve dramatically britains air quality by 2020.our national air quality plan for consultation will include:w a legal requirement targeted at the most polluted towns and cities, to create low emission zones.w new incentives for local schemes that cut transport-related pollution, and encourage walking and cycling.w a review of the mot process, to see whether changes could be introduced to cut emissions from existing vehicles.w support for new eu proposals on air quality targets and updated plans to more quickly meet existing eu air quality standards for concentrations of nitrogen dioxide.to promote innovation and greener transport choices we will:w support ambitious eu vehicle emission standards, and reform vehicle excise duty to drive continuous reductions in greenhouse gas and other pollutants from the uk car fleet and return revenues to levels projected in 2010. this will include introducing separate banding for new diesel cars.w encouragethemarketforelectricvehicles,includingwithtargeted support for buses, taxis and light freight, and early requirements to use low emission vehicles in the public sector. we will set a target of 2040 for the date after which only ultra-low emission vehicles will be permitted on uk roads for non-freight purposes.w work with industry to accelerate the commercial introduction of zero emission fuel cell electric vehicles, and facilitate the uk-wide introduction of hydrogen fuelling infrastructure.w review the best way to keep our regulatory framework updated to permit use of driverless and personal electric vehicles.w support options for an intercity cycleway along the hs2 route, within the overall budget for the project.876better places to live | communities, farming and the natural environment88w implement the recommendations of the get britain cycling report, including steps to deliver a 10 a head annual public expenditure on cycling within existing budgets. this will allow greater investment in cycling including bike lanes, high-volume secure bike parking, and road safety measures to keep cyclists safe.6.6. improving local public transporthigh-quality public transport is essential to building sustainable communities and local economies, and two thirds of public transport journeys are made by bus. with more people commuting to work by bus than any other mode of public transport, buses are of significant importance to the economy. bus services are also particularly important to many rural and isolated communities, where one in five of the population lives.w carry out a review of bus funding and bus policies and introduce a five-year investment plan to give the industry and local authorities certainty and help plan investment. we will support local areas that want to bring forward plans for regulating the bus network in their area.w give new powers to local authorities and communities to improve transport in their areas, including the ability to introduce network-wide ticketing like in london.w support the expansion of smart ticketing systems.w continue funding for local economic and sustainable transportinfrastructure through the local growth fund.w help bus companies trade in older, more polluting buses andcoaches for newer, low emissions ones, helping develop the market for low-carbon buses.6.7 sustainable rural communitiesa thriving rural community needs local services and community facilities like schools, public transport, local shops, cultural venues and pubs. it needs enough homes, affordable for local families, to ensure those services are viable. and it needs public transport: travel costs are a major component of rural poverty. liberal democrats understand the changes needed to support a living, working countryside.we will:w renew the 201015 commitment that there will be no programme of post office closures and protect royal mails universal service obligation to deliver across the uk for the same price.liberal democrat manifesto 2015w introduceretainedpoliceofficers,fullytrainedofficersavailable to respond when needed, to increase police presence in rural communities.w develop the community budgets model for use in rural areas to combine services, encouraging the breaking down of boundaries between different services. this will help keep rural services like gp surgeries, pharmacies, post offices and libraries open by enabling them to cooperate, share costs and co-locate in shared facilities.w continue the fuel discount scheme for remote areas implemented by liberal democrat ministers and work with the european commission to extend it to further remote areas with high fuel costs.w work with local authorities to integrate transport networks in rural areas, building on the work of liberal democrat ministers total transport pilot.896better places to live | communities, farming and the natural environmentgreen britainguarantee:five green lawsa nature act which will include:a resource efficiency and zero waste britain act which will include:w implementation of recommendations from our planned stern report on resource efficiency, whichthe natural capital committee will conduct.w increased penaltiesfor waste crimes, aiming to move from an average fine of 50,000 to 75,000 and to an average sentence of 12 to 18 months.w a statutory recycling target of 70% for waste in england.w regulation to promote design that enhances repairability, reuse and recycling, requiring specified products to be sold with parts and labour guarantees for at least five years.w placing the natural capital committee on a statutory footing. the committee was set up in 2012; it provides advice to the government on the state of englands natural assets including forests, rivers, land, minerals and oceans.w a requirement for government to set outa 25-year plan for recovering nature, with annual updates to parliament, including how to reverse the decline of uk species andtheir habitats and ensure that bees and other insects are able to fulfil their important role as crop pollinators.w the introduction of a new public sector sustainability duty, requiring steadily higher green criteria in public procurement policy, and placing requirements on public authorities to act in a sustainable manner.w implementation of the findings of the independent panel on forestry, creating a new public body, free from political interference and securely funded, to own and manage the national forests.w transposition of eu air and water quality targets into uk law to confirm our commitments.w a sustainable water abstraction regime, for the public, industry and the natural environment.w the formation of a one million square kilometre southern atlantic ocean reserve.90liberal democrat manifesto 2015liberal democrats will put the environment at the heart of government policy. wewill pass five green laws to establisha permanent legal framework for a prosperous, sustainable economy.a green transport act which will include:a zero carbon britain act which will include:a green buildings act which will include:w a statutory target of 2030 by which time all major, regularly used rail routes will need to be electrified.w a requirement that every new bus and taxi is ultra low emission from 2030 and every car on the road meets that standard by 2040.w the creation of low emission zones as part of a national air quality plan, including a legal requirement for the most polluted towns and cities.w a new statutory framework that all new rail franchises include a stronger focus on customers.w updates to roads regulation to promote innovation in transport like driverless cars and personal electric vehicles.w a new legally-binding target for zero carbon britain by 2050, to be monitored and audited by the climate change committee (ccc).the climate change act 2008 established an aim to reduceuk greenhouse gas emissions by 80% by 2050 based on the 1990 baseline.w a 2030 power sector decarbonisation target of 50-100g per kwh, as recommended by the ccc.w emission performance standards for existing coal power stations, designed to ensure electricity generation from unabated coal will stop by 2025.w giving full borrowing powers to the green investment bank,to boost further investment in low- carbon technologies.w a council taxdiscount for significant improvements in energy efficiency in homes.w ambitious targets for all social and private rented homes to reach energy performance certificate band c by 2027.w a statutory target to bring the homes of all fuel-poor households to band c by 2027.w a new legal framework to require regulatorsto facilitate the development of deep geothermal heat, large- scale heat pumps, waste industrial heat and energy storage systems.w new powers for government to introduce new energy efficiency and heat saving regulations to reduce heat and energy use.9192affordable homes for allmeeting ourhousing needsfor people to live fulfilled lives they need a decent home at a cost they can afford. but that simple ambition is getting further and further out of reach. britain has failed for decades to build enough homes, and in many places property prices and rents have risen beyond what normal working families can afford. we have to speed up house building and stop prices from getting any further out of reach of families.79394for people to live fulfilled lives they need a decent home at a cost they can afford. but that simple ambition is getting further and further out of reach. britain has failed for decades to build enough homes, and in many places property prices and rents have risen beyond what normal working families can afford. meanwhilemany older people in homes that are no longer right for their circumstances would like to move but do not have suitable options.we have made a start in addressing this. the supply of affordable rented housing has been increasing. we have liberalised the planning system, while protecting important green spaces. we have pushed government departments to release unwanted sites for homes.but the problems are now in danger of becoming a crisis, with home ownership plummeting among the under 40s, many young people priced out of even renting a place of their own, and the risk of a new housing bubble, focused on london and the south east. we have to speed up house building and stop prices from getting any further out of reach of families.liberal democrat manifesto 2015a record of deliverya promise of moreset an ambitious goal to build 300,000 homes a year, including in 10 new garden cities in areas where homes are needed mostrestored house building from record lows to nearly 150,000 a yearhelped families buy a home with help to buy equity loansbanned revenge evictions where rogue landlords evict tenants who make complaintsimproved the energy efficiency ofa million homes since 2013, cutting overall uk energy use by 2.5% a yearnew rent to own homes where your monthly payments steadily buy you a stake in the propertynew help to rent tenancy deposit loans to help young people get into their first placecut council tax by 100 for 10 years if you insulate your home, and ban landlords from letting out homes tenants cannot reasonably afford to heat7.1 building more and better homesfor far too long britain has built many fewer homes than we need; unless we build enough to meet demand, year after year, we will find housing costs rise further out of reach. that is why we have set an ambitious target of increasing the rate of house building to 300,000 a year. within the first year of the next parliament, we will publish a long-term plan that sets out how this goal will be achieved.our plans will include:w at least ten new garden cities in england, in areas where there is local support, providing tens of thousands of high-quality new homes, with gardens and shared green space, jobs, schools and public transport. we will encourage rural local authorities to follow these principles on a smaller scale, too, developing new garden villages or suburbs as part of their plans for growth.957affordable homes for all | meeting our housing need96w up to five major new settlements along a garden cities railway between oxford and cambridge.w ambitious targets for development on unwanted public sector sites through the homes and communities agency, with local authorities given new powers to ensure development happens on any unused site in which the public sector has an interest.w a review of compulsory purchase legislation to facilitatesite assembly, including for garden cities. we will also pilot techniques for capturing the increase in land values from the granting of planning permission, helping to deliver our garden cities.w agovernmentcommissioningprogrammetoboosthousebuilding towards our 300,000 target; where the market alone fails to deliver sufficient numbers, government agencies will directly commission homes for sale and rent to fill the gap. we are already piloting this direct approach in cambridgeshire.w anewgovernment-backedhousinginvestmentbanktoprovide long-term capital for major new settlements and help attract finance for major house building projects.7.2 improving planninggood planning is essential to delivering sustainable communities. with effective planning rules, we can ensure the new homes we build are well connected to public transport, resilient to the threats of climate change, safe, warm and secure, and situated in real communities where people can easily come together. we will work with local authorities to ensure they think for the long term, and use their powers to facilitate an affordable local housing market.we will:w put local authorities in the driving seat for plan-led development by requiring them to make a plan for 15 years of housing need, working collaboratively with neighbouring councils where necessary to identify sites. we will strengthen the duty to cooperate to help authorities  like cambridge, oxford and luton  with insufficient space within the local authority boundary to meet housing demand to grow, through development on sites beyond the local authority boundaries. this long-term approach will enable us to secure the homes we need while being much stricter about proposals that deviate from the local plan. we will: create a community right of appeal in cases where planning decisions go against the approved local plan, or a local plan that is emerging and has undergone substantive consultation.liberal democrat manifesto 2015 not allow developers appeals against planning decisions that are in line with the local plan. not allow planning appeals solely on the basis of challenges to the 15-year master plan.w improve housing needs assessments to ensure they respondto demand, including through price signals, rather than simply need, and segment more effectively demand from different kinds of household, including high-quality shared accommodation for young people. all areas will be expected to plan for the needsof older people for age-appropriate housing and we will work with local authorities to help people who wish to right size, particularly in later life.w require local authorities to keep a register of people who want a self-build plot in the local area and plan to meet demand for these plots, including through affordable land: plots on which self- builders can take a long-term lease at an affordable rent and build or commission a home.w update planning law to introduce the concept of landscape scale planning and ensure new developments promote walking, cycling, car sharing and public transport and improve rather than diminish access to green spaces.w prioritisedevelopmentonbrownfieldandtowncentresitesand bring to an end the permitted development rights for converting offices to residential.w enablelocalauthoritiesto: attach planning conditions to new developments to ensurehomes are occupied, tackling the growth of buy to leave empty investments from overseas in property hotspots like london. levy up to 200% council tax on second homes where they judge this to be appropriate. pilot new planning conditions to ensure local communities benefit from increased housing supply.7.3 affordable housingthe government has an essential role to play in supportingthe development of affordable housing. we have maintained a substantial programme of affordable house building in the last five years, in part enabled by designing innovative products that can deliver new homes at a lower cost. we will continue to innovate, enabling local authorities, housing associations and central government alike to build many more homes.977affordable homes for all | meeting our housing needrising number of private rented dwellings43298liberal democrat manifesto 2015millions2008200920102011201220132014we will:w reviewthehomesandcommunitiesagencysgrantprogrammes to simplify and streamline the process and enable more innovation.w allow local authorities more flexibility to borrow to build affordable housing, including traditional council housing, and devolve full control of the right to buy.w scrapplanstoexemptsmallerhousingdevelopmentschemes from their obligation to provide affordable homes.w encourageaffordablehousingprovidersbothcouncilsand housing associations  to innovate, including using the development of homes for sale or market rent to help subsidise new affordable homes. we will refocus the vacant building credit so it only applies to properties that have been vacant for an extended period.w tackle overcrowding with a new system to incentivise social landlords to reduce the number of tenants under-occupying their homes, freeing up larger properties.w introduce a new intermediate housing fund to fund intermediate housing products, including: affordable rent homes, at up to 80% of local market rent. shared ownership homes, where customers buy aproportion of the home and pay an affordable rent for therest. a new rent to own model where monthly paymentssteadily accrue the tenant a percentage stake in theproperty, owning it outright after 30 years. new build shared accommodation at the local lha sharedaccommodation rate.we recognise that most people aspire to own their own home, and believe in supporting people on the journey to home ownership. but policies that promote home ownership should be focused on newly built homes to prevent artificial pressure on prices, and should not discriminate on the basis of previous housing tenure.7.4 protecting private tenants and leaseholdersmore and more people  including families  are renting in the private sector for the long term. we believe private renting is an important part of the housing market, but the balance has shifted too far against the tenant, and more needs to be done to help people making a home in rented property.997affordable homes for all | meeting our housing need100w improve protections against rogue landlords and encourage a new multi-year tenancy with an agreed inflation-linked annual rent increase built in.w enable local authorities to operate licensing schemes for rental properties in areas where they believe it is needed.w establish a voluntary register of rented property where either the landlord or the tenant can register the property, to improve enforcement and tax transparency.w ban letting agent fees to tenants if the transparency requirements we introduced are not successful in bringing fees down to an affordable level by the end of 2016.w extend the use of rent repayment orders to allow tenants to have their rent refunded when a property is found to contain serious risks to health, and withhold rent from landlords who have not carried out court-ordered improvements within a reasonable period of time.w introduce a new help to rent scheme to provide government- backed tenancy deposit loans for all first-time renters under 30.w conduct a full review of the help single people get under homelessness legislation.7.5 affordable warmth and greener homeswarming our homes is an essential part of the fight against climate change, and also vital to keep bills affordable. energy pricesin britain are lower than the eu average but our bills are higher because our homes are so poorly insulated. we have made huge advances in this parliament, increasing standards for newly built homes, and improving more than a million homes in just two years. in the next parliament we will go further, ensuring at least four million homes are improved by 2020, not only lowering bills and helping to tackle the scourge of fuel poverty, but generating jobs too.we will:w remove exemptions in the zero carbon standard for new homes, increasing the standard steadily and extending it to non-domestic buildings from 2019. we will promote the development of off-site manufacturing techniques, which have been shown to improve energy performance of buildings.w pass a new green buildings act to set new energy efficiency targets, including a long-term ambition for every home to reach at least an energy rating of band c by 2035.we will:liberal democrat manifesto 2015w act to tackle fuel poverty, ensuring all low-income homes are brought up to band c by 2027, with continued support for the green deal communities programme, enabling local councils to provide help street by street.w improve the standard of private rented and social housing, requiring these homes to be upgraded to band c by 2027.w introduce incentives to help everyone invest in energy efficiency: a council tax reduction of at least 100 for 10 years, whenthe residents home has an energy saving improvement ofat least two bands. a new feed out tariff for investment in solid wall insulation,the most expensive and difficult energy saving investmentfor some homes.w reform the green deal pay as you save scheme into a newgreen homes loan scheme, funding renewable heat andelectricity alongside energy efficiency.w boost community energy efficiency by empowering the greeninvestment bank to develop innovative financial products forwhole street or district-wide energy efficiency retrofits.w develop a range of targeted, innovative programmes to supportthe above, including infrastructure funding where appropriate, such as: insulation on prescription to link up the nhs with the fuel poverty agenda. an off-gas-grid strategy to help rural areas benefit from new technologies. interest-free loans to fund energy efficiency home improvements.1017affordable homes for all | meeting our housing need102freedom and opportunityequal rightsfor allliberal democrats have always been championsof liberty and human rights. freedom ofexpression has recently been under renewedattack, and siren voices call for us to sacrificefreedom to gain illusory security. liberal 8 democrats reject this false choice: true securityfor individuals and for our nation must be built on a platform of equal rights and civil liberties. discrimination and inequality can hold people back just as much as a lack of legal freedoms. opportunities are not equally distributed in modern britain. that must change, and will with liberal democrats in government.103104liberal democrats have always been champions of liberty and human rights. no one can make the most of their lives if their basic freedoms are violated. this election comes just a month before we celebrate the 800th anniversary of magna carta, a foundation stone of our liberties. legal protections have come a long way since then, but as society and technology becomes more complex there is a never-ending struggle to reassert the principle of individual liberty. freedom of expression has recently been under renewed attack, and siren voices call for us to sacrifice freedom to gain illusory security. liberal democrats reject this false choice: true security for individuals and for our nation must be built on a platform of equal rights and civil liberties.discrimination and inequality can hold people back just as much as a lack of legal freedoms. opportunities are not equally distributed in modern britain. where you are from, what your parents did, your ethnicity, health, sexuality and gender still too often affect your chances in life, your educational attainments, your work prospects, how you are treated by the police and the justice system, andeven how long you will live. that must change, and will with liberal democrats in government.liberal democrat manifesto 2015a record of deliverya promise of moreprotect your privacy by updating data laws for the internet age with a digital bill of rightsscrapped id cards and blocked the so-called snoopers charter that would have monitored everyones internet usefreedoms act to cut intrusive cctv, stop fingerprinting children in schools and stop aggressive wheel clampingintroduced equal marriage for gay and lesbian couplesreduced the gender pay gap and increased the number of women on boardsstopped locking up children of asylum seekers and strengthened rules on police stop and search8.1 equality and diversitya second freedoms act to protect free speech, stop heavy-handed policing and ban mosquito devices that discriminate against young people.combat homophobic bullying and discrimination, including in schoolssupport a million more women who want to work with better childcare, help with caring responsibilities and action against discriminationfight discrimination in the criminal justice system and recruit more black, asian and minority ethnic police officersa fair society should treat its citizens equally and with dignity. in this parliament, thanks to liberal democrats in government, there have been key advances in the fight for equality  like introducing same- sex marriage and banning age discrimination. but we must continue our work to fight prejudice and discrimination based on race, age, religion or belief, gender, sexuality, and disability. we will enact the remaining unimplemented clauses of the equality act 2010.1058freedom and opportunity | equal rights for allour support forlgbt1967sex between men decrimnalised in england and wales1975liberal party becomes the first party to commit to a gay rights policy1061988liberal democrats oppose section 28, which banned teachers from presenting homosexuality as acceptable1979law in scotland brought into line with england and wales1998allowing trans people to change the gender on their birth certificate becomes liberal democrat policy2001age of consent lowered to 16 and finally made equal between gay and straight people2010liberal democrats become the first major party to create policy on equal marriage2008liberal democrats adopt official policythat asylum seekers should not be deported if they face imprionment, torture or murder as a result of their sexuality2004civil partnerships introduced2014the first couple married on march 29th at the stroke of midnight2013equal marriage becomes law on 17th july 2013liberal democrat manifesto 2015to advance the cause of women and gender equality we will:w set an ambitious goal to see a million more women in work by 2020 thanks to more jobs, better childcare, and better back-to- work support.w challenge gender stereotyping and early sexualisation, working with schools to promote positive body image and widespread understanding of sexual consent law, and break down outdated perceptions of gender appropriateness of particular academic subjects.w work to end the gender pay gap, including with new rules on gender pay transparency.w continue the drive for diversity in business leadership, maintaining momentum towards at least 30% of board members being women and encouraging gender diversity among senior managers, too. we will work to achieve gender equity in government programmes that support entrepreneurs.to promote equality in relationships and for lgbt+ individuals, we will:w give legal rights and obligations to cohabiting couples in the event of relationship breakdown or one partner dying without a will.w permit humanist weddings and opposite sex civil partnerships, and liberalise the rules about the location, timing and content of wedding ceremonies.w supportschoolstotacklehomophobicandtransphobicbullying and discrimination, and to establish a tolerant and inclusive environment for all their pupils. we will remove schools exemption from the bar on harassment in these areas while protecting the right to teach about religious doctrine.w promote international recognition of same sex marriages and civil partnerships as part of a comprehensive international lgbt rights strategy that supports the cause of decriminalising homosexuality in other countries.w seek to pardon all those with historic convictions for consensual homosexual activity between adults.w enhance the experience of all football fans by making homophobic chanting a criminal offence, like racist chanting. w asktheadvisorycommitteeonsafetyofblood,tissuesandorgans periodically to review rules around men who have sex with men donating blood to consider what restrictions remain necessary.to tackle the racial discrimination faced by black, asian and minority ethnic (bame) people we will:1078freedom and opportunity | equal rights for all108w build on the coalitions bame access to finance report to identify ways to encourage more bame applicants to apply for finance and set up small business. we will publish diversity data on government entrepreneurship programmes and seek to achieve fair representation of bame communities.w encourage businesses to ensure at least one place on their board is filled by a bame candidate.w monitor and tackle the bame pay gap.w outlaw caste discrimination.w maintain funding for people to develop and improve their englishlanguage skills to enable them to fully participate in society andachieve their potential.w challenge discrimination in the criminal justice system by: improving the safeguards in police stop and search powers in england and wales with tighter guidance and requiring police to wear body cameras in section 60 areas, the establishment of which will require judicial sanction. boosting police recruitment from bame groups.  conducting a full review of the causes of theoverrepresentation of bame individuals in the criminal justice system.to tackle religious discrimination and support faith and belief communities in working together we will:w continue support for the interfaith network to promote strong and sustainable relations between different faith communities.w support projects aimed at tackling intolerance such as show racism the red card and the anne frank trust uk.w workcloselywithfaithandcommunityorganisations,suchas the community security trust (which works to protect the jewish community against antisemitic attacks) and the muslim council of britain, to prevent hate crime, including at places of worship like synagogues and mosques. we are determined to combat antisemitism and anti-muslim hate in the uk and internationally.to empower people with disabilities to live full lives and achieve their potential we will:w improve the benefits system for disabled people, based on the principle of one assessment, one budget. this will bring together support like personal independence payment, employment support allowance, a replacement for the independent living fund and health and social care entitlements. we will implement the proposals set out in the 2015 green paper on learning disabilities.liberal democrat manifesto 2015w ensure disabled people who need an extra room are entitled to one in any assessment of their housing benefit needs.w help greater numbers of disabled people work by encouraging employers to shortlist any qualified disabled candidate and providing advice about workplace adaptation.w maintain disabled students allowance to ensure students with disabilities receive appropriate support in their university studies, and review the impact of any changes to consider additional protections for the most vulnerable students with disabilities.w make it easier to get around by: making more stations wheelchair accessible and givingwheelchair users priority over childrens buggies whenspace is limited. bringing into effect the provisions of the 2010 equality acton discrimination by private hire vehicles and taxis. improving the legislative framework governing bluebadges. building on our successes in improving wheelchair accessto improve accessibility of public transport for people withother disabilities, including visual and auditory impairment. setting up a benchmarking standard for accessible cities.w tackle disability hate crime by ensuring proper monitoring of incidents by police forces and other public authorities.w formallyrecognisebritishsignlanguageasanofficiallanguage of the united kingdom.to ensure the highest standards of equality and fairness in public services we will:w maintain the public sector equality duty and encourage external providers to the public sector to follow best practice in terms of diversity.w prohibit discrimination on the grounds of religion in the provision of public services.w move to name blank recruitment wherever possible in the public sector.w replicate the civil service accelerated programme for underrepresented groups across the public sector.w requirediversityinpublicappointments.wewillintroducea presumption that every shortlist should include a bame candidate. we will establish an independent committee that will monitor the drive for greater diversity in public appointments and verify the independence of the appointment process to public bodies, boards and institutions.w work to ensure the shift to digital by default for public services does not leave people behind, by upholding the highest standards1098freedom and opportunity | equal rights for all110of accessibility in digital services and maintaining government programmes on digital inclusion.8.2 freedom of speech and the free pressas the charlie hebdo attacks in paris showed, freedom of expression cannot be taken for granted. in an open society there can be no right not to be offended, which is why liberal democrats in government have strengthened the law to make it harder for prosecutions to be brought for using 'insulting words', and haveled the way in protecting journalists sources under the 2000 regulation of investigatory powers act (ripa). yet censorship and self-censorship are still rife, and the threat of prosecution can have a chilling effect on the willingness of people to speak out against injustice and corruption. to change this and promote investigative journalism, we will:w introduce statutory public interest defences for exceptional cases where journalists may need to break the law (such as ripa, the 2010 bribery act, and the 1998 computer misuse act) to expose corruption or other criminal acts.w ensure judicial authorisation is required for the acquisition of communications data which might reveal journalists sources or other privileged communications, for any of the purposes allowed under ripa; and allow journalists the opportunity to addressthe court before authorisation is granted, where this would notjeopardise the investigation.w undertake a post-legislative review of the 2013 defamation act,which liberal democrats drove through parliament, to ensure thenew provisions are reducing the chill of libel threats.w introduce, after consultation on the detail, the changes tothe 1998 data protection act recommended by lord justice leveson to provide a fairer balance between personal privacy and the requirements of journalism, ensuring that the position of investigative journalists is safeguarded.to promote the independence of the media from political influence we will remove ministers from any role in appointments to the bbc trust or the board of ofcom.to guarantee press freedom, we will pass a british first amendment law, to require the authorities and the courts to have regard to the importance of a free media in a democratic society.to nurture public interest journalism and protect the public from press abuse, we are committed to a system of accountability that is totally independent of both government and the newspaper industry, as set out in the royal charter on press regulation.liberal democrat manifesto 2015we share the hope of lord justice leveson that the incentives for the press to sign up to genuinely independent self-regulationwill succeed. but if, in the judgment of the press recognition panel, after 12 months of operation, there is significant non-cooperation by newspaper publishers, then  as leveson himself concluded  parliament will need to act, drawing on a range of options including the legislative steps necessary to ensure that independent self- regulation is delivered. where possible, we would seek to do this on the same cross-party basis that achieved the construction of the leveson scheme by the royal charter.8.3 policing and security service powersliberal democrats believe security and liberty are two sides of the same coin: you cannot have one without the other. the police and intelligence agencies do vital work to protect the public and we are rightly proud of them. but we always have to be vigilant that the state does not overreach itself, as it has done at times through corruption, heavy-handedness or illiberal laws.we will:w ensure proper oversight of the security services.w establishinlegislationthatthepoliceandintelligenceagenciesshould not obtain data on uk residents from foreign governmentsthat it would not be legal to obtain in the uk under uk law. w back a full judicial enquiry into complicity in torture if thecurrent investigation by the commons intelligence and securitycommittee investigation fails to get to truth.w endindefinitedetentionforimmigrationpurposes.w introduce restrictions on the indefinite use of police bail.w require judicial authorisation for the use of undercover policeofficers to infiltrate alleged criminal groups.w get to the full truth about corrupt practices in parts of the policeand the press by ensuring that the daniel morgan panel inquiryis completed expeditiously and that part 2 of the leveson inquiry starts as soon as the criminal prosecutions in the hacking scandal are completed.w identify practical alternatives to the use of closed material procedures within the justice system, including the provisions of the 2013 justice and security act, with the aim of restoring the principle of open justice.1118freedom and opportunity | equal rights for all112liberal democrat manifesto 20158.4 securing liberty onlinein the modern digital age, the power of the state and of corporate interests can threaten our privacy and liberty. we have achieved much in rolling back the over-mighty state  passing the first ever protection of freedoms act to restore lost civil liberties, securing the ongoing root and branch review of ripa and legislating for the creation of a privacy and civil liberties board  but we cannotbe complacent. there will be a complete overhaul of surveillance powers in 2016. we need to ensure this and other opportunities are seized as a chance to control excessive state power, and ensure that in an era when surveillance is easier than ever before, we maintain the right to privacy and free speech. privacy should always be the norm for personal data, meaning surveillance must always be justified and proportionate and any demand to read private encrypted communications must be targeted and proportionate.we will:w pass a digital bill of rights, to define and enshrine the digital rights of the citizen.w safeguard the essential freedom of the internet and back net neutrality, the principle that internet service providers should enable access to all lawful content and applications regardless of the source, and without favouring or blocking particular products or websites.w oppose the introduction of the so-called snoopers charter.we blocked the draft communications data bill and woulddo so again. requiring companies to store a record of everyones internet activities for a year or to collect third-party communications data for non-business purposes is disproportionate and unacceptable, as is the blanket surveillance of our paper post.w setstricterlimitsonsurveillanceandconsidercarefullythe outcomes of the reviews we initiated on surveillance legislation by the royal united services institute and the independent reviewer of terrorism legislation david anderson qc. we are opposed to the blanket collection of uk residents personal communications by the police or the intelligence agencies. access to metadata, live content, or the stored content of personal communications must only take place without consent where there is reasonable suspicion of criminal activity or to prevent threats to life.1138freedom and opportunity | equal rights for all8.5 securing our rights and freedoms in law800 years after magna carta, the need for written, legal guarantees of our rights and liberties has not gone away. we will:w protect the human rights act and enshrine the un convention on the rights of the child in uk law. we will take appropriate action to comply with decisions of uk courts and the european court of human rights.w block any further attempts to limit the right to trial by jury.w pass a new freedoms act, to protect citizens from excessivestate powers.our freedoms act will:w tighten the regulation of cctv, with more powers for the surveillance camera commissioner.w extend the rules governing storage of dna and fingerprints by public authorities to include all biometric data  like facial images.w protect free speech by ensuring insulting words, jokes, and non-intentional acts, are not treated as criminal, and that social media communications are not treated more harshly than other media.w prevent heavy-handed policing of demonstrations by tightly regulating the use of kettling.w reform joint enterprise laws.w banhigh-frequencymosquitodeviceswhichdiscriminateagainst young people.w strengthen safeguards to prevent pre-emptive arrests andmisuse of pre-charge bail conditions to restrict civil libertiesand stifle peaceful protest.w end the ministerial veto on release of information under thefreedom of information act.w cut back on the petty over-regulation of everyday life, likeremoving licensing requirements for leafleting for community events, liberalising the restrictions on songs and readingsat wedding ceremonies, and permitting swimming in open bodies of water.114liberal democrat manifesto 2015our digital bill of rights will:w enshrine the principle that everyone has the right to control their own personal data, and that everyone should be able to view, correct, and (where appropriate and proportionate) delete their personal data, wherever it is held.w forbid any public body from collecting, storing or processing personal data without statutory authority, and require any such legislation to be regularly reviewed.w give increased powers and resources for the information commissioner and introduce custodial sentences for egregious breaches of the data protection act.w ensure privacy is protected to the same extent in telecoms and online as in the offline world. public authorities should only invade an individuals privacy where there is reasonable suspicion of criminal activity or where it is otherwise necessary and proportionate to do so in the public interest, and with appropriate oversight by the courts.w ensure that privacy policies and terms and conditions of online services, including smartphone apps, must be clear, concise and easy for the user to understand.w upholdtherightofindividuals,businessesandpublic bodies to use strong encryption to protect their privacy and security online.w make it clear that online services have a duty to provide age-appropriate policies, guidance and support to the children and young people who use their services.1158freedom and opportunity | equal rights for all116liberal democrat manifesto 2015secure communitiespolicing, justice and the border forcewith liberal democrats in government, crime is down 10%. that means fewer homes burgled, fewer communities blighted and fewer people hurt. but there is much more to do to reduce crime and free people from fear.the best way to protect the public is to stop crime from happening in the first place, whether by designing out crime, intervening early, or with effective punishments that challenge offenders and address their criminal behaviour. we will make sure the number one priority for the criminal justice system is to prevent crime by cutting reoffending.9117118no one can fulfil their potential if they live in fear. by ensuring our laws are upheld, we can build strong communities with opportunity for all.with liberal democrats in government, crime is down 10%. that means fewer homes burgled, fewer communities blighted and fewer people hurt. but there is much more to do to reduce crime and free people from fear.the best way to protect the public is to stop crime from happening in the first place, whether by designing out crime, intervening early, or with effective punishments that challenge offenders and address their criminal behaviour. we will make sure the number one priority for the criminal justice system is to prevent crime by cutting reoffending.we have begun to tackle abuse in our immigration system, too, closing colleges that break the rules, cracking down on illegal working and human trafficking, and reintroducing border checks. we will build on this record to rebuild confidence in our borders and immigration system.liberal democrat manifesto 2015a record of deliverya promise of morefocus policing on crime prevention, saving money by scrapping police and crime commissionerscut crime by 10%, with evidence- based policing directed at the front lineimproved treatment for addiction and mental health problems in prisonmore prisoners working longer hours with wages contributing to a victims fundnational strategy on fighting violence against women and girls and ending the awful practice of female genital mutilationreintroduced border checks so we know who is coming in and leaving the uk9.1 preventing crimecut crime with specialistdrug courts and non-criminal punishments that help addicts get cleanreform prisons to focus on turning offenders away from a life of crimeend fgm at home and abroad in a generation, teach sexual consent in our schools, and crack down on domestic violencecomplete border checks and use the information to improve our visa rules and deport people with no right to staycrime and fear of crime are amongst the greatest threats to our security and our ability to live our lives to the full. our focus is on trying to prevent crime from happening in the first place.we will:w design out opportunities for crime, by improving the built environment, the design of new technologies, and community resilience.w strengthen the what works centre within the college of policing and require hm inspectorate of constabulary to scrutinise the use1199secure communities | policing, justice and the border forceof evidence by local forces in designing their policing plans.w build on the success of crime maps to use data more effectivelyto reduce crime, working towards the publication of business-by- business data for crimes committed on commercial premises, and exploring the feasibility of mandatory reporting of fraud losses by individual credit and debit card providers.9.2 improving local policingwe are successfully bringing down crime and improving the efficiency of our police forces, but there is more to do. we believe the police could be far more effective with proper support and shared best practice.we will:w guarantee the police pursue the publics priorities by replacing police and crime commissioners with police boards made up of councillors from across the force area.w encourage police forces and other emergency services to work together at a local, regional and national level to reduce back office costs and deliver efficiency savings.w support and expand police now, which is bringing high-flying graduates and skilled mid-career professionals into our police forces.w explore the case for transferring responsibility for more serious national crime to the national crime agency, enabling local police forces to focus on local crime and anti-social behaviour.w step up our work with eu partners to tackle serious and organised crime.9.3 improve support for victims of crimethe criminal justice system exists to protect the public from crime; where crime does occur victims are our first priority. we needto make sure they, and their families, are supported both in the aftermath of crimes and throughout the justice system.we will:w enact a victims bill of rights.w create a single point of contact for victims to give early access toinformation and support.w changesentencingguidelinestoincreasesentencesavailablefor120hate crimes.liberal democrat manifesto 2015w give victims of crime a right to review what progress police have made to investigate the crime committed against them including cases where the police have declined to investigate.w give victims a right to choose restorative justice.w implement the modern slavery strategy to reduce peopletrafficking and support victims.9.4 tackling violence against women and girlsa fair society cannot tolerate todays unacceptable level of violence against women and girls in britain. we have made progress since 2010 but we will not rest until women feel safe and respected.we will:w ensure teachers, social workers, police officers and health workers in areas where there is high prevalence of female genital mutilation or forced marriage are trained to help those at risk.w require the teaching of sexual consent in schools as part of age- appropriate sex and relationships education.w improve the provision of rape crisis centres and refuges for victims of domestic violence with a national network and national sources of funding.w protect funding for tackling violence against women and girls and maintain the post of international champion for preventing this violence.w create a national helpline for victims of domestic and sexual violence  regardless of gender  to provide support, encourage reporting and secure more convictions.w work to ensure the whole criminal justice system updates practice in line with the director of public prosecutions guidance on sexual consent.9.5 improving justice and rehabilitating offendersthe criminal justice system can do more to turn people away froma life of crime. we have made progress in government, for the first time providing probation support for offenders serving sentencesof less than twelve months. yet still, far too many people are simply warehoused in prison, instead of learning skills that will enable them to earn an honest living when they are released.we believe that a large prison population is a sign of failure to rehabilitate, not a sign of success. so our aim is to significantly reduce the prison population by using more effective alternative punishments and correcting offending behaviour.1219secure communities | policing, justice and the border forcefalling crime110001000090008000700060005000labour lib demsthis shows the falling trend in crime from the crime survey england and wales.122liberal democrat manifesto 20152008200920102011201220132014we will:w prioritiseprisonfordangerousoffendersandthosewhocommit the most serious offences with increased use of tough non- custodial punishments including weekend or evening custody, curfews, unpaid work in the community and gps tagging. this will enable us to introduce a presumption against short-term sentences that will help reduce the prison population and cut crime.w promote community justice panels and other local schemes designed to stop problems from escalating.w extend the role of the youth justice board to all offenders aged under 21, give them the power to commission mental health services and devolve youth custody budgets to local authorities.w create a womens justice board, modelled on the youth justice board, to improve rehabilitation of female offenders.w reform prisons so they become places of work, rehabilitation and learning, with offenders receiving an education and skills assessment within one week, starting a relevant course and programme of support within one month and able to complete courses on release.w improve prison governance and accountability with a new value added measure to assess progress in reducing reoffending, providing education and tackling addiction and mental health issues, enabling good prisons to earn greater autonomy. we will strengthen the independence of the chief inspectors of prisons and probation.w provide experts in courts and police stations to identify where mental health or a drug problem is behind an offenders behaviour so they can be dealt with in a way that is appropriate. we will pilot us-style drug and alcohol courts.w strengthen the realistic prospect of custody test to reduce the use of remand for suspected offenders who can be safely monitored in the community and are unlikely to receive a prison sentence if found guilty.liberal democrats will adopt the default position that  unless there are strong reasons to the contrary in specific cases  public servants rather than commercial organisations should provide detention, prison, immigration enforcement and secure units.1239secure communities | policing, justice and the border force9.6 ensuring access to justiceaccess to justice is an essential part of a free society and a functioning legal system. in this parliament we have had to make significant savings from the legal aid budget, but in the next parliament our priority for delivering efficiency in the ministry of justice should be prison and court reform, using technology and innovation to reduce costs.we will:w review the criminal legal aid market and ensure there are no further savings without an impact assessment as to the viability of a competitive and diverse market of legal aid providers.w reduce pressure on the criminal legal aid budget by requiring company directors to take out insurance against prosecution for fraud and permitting the use of restrained assets to pay reasonable legal bills.w carry out an immediate review of civil legal aid, judicial review and court fees, in consultation with the judiciary, to ensure legal aid is available to all those who need it, that those of modest means can bring applications for judicial review of allegedly unlawful government action and that court and tribunal fees will not put justice beyond the reach of those who seek it. this will mean reversing any recent rises in up-front court fees that make justice unaffordable for many, and instead spreading the fee burden more fairly.w retain access to recoverable success fees and insurance premiums in asbestosis claims and where an individual issuing the police; and also for both claimant and defendant in publication and data protection claims, except where one party is significantly better resourced than the other.w promote the use of alternative buildings for magistrates courts and local dispute resolution programmes like community justice panels to bring justice back into the community.w support innovation like the provision of civil justice online and expansion of alternative dispute resolution procedures.w encourage the widespread use of mediation for separating couples, while protecting access to the family courts where necessaryw develop a strategy that will deliver advice and legal support to help people with everyday problems like personal debt and social welfare issues, working across government and involving non- profit advice agencies.124liberal democrat manifesto 20159.7 tackling terrorism and violent extremismterrorism and violent extremism remain a serious threat to the united kingdom, which requires a proportionate response.we will:w work with religious and community leaders, civil society groups and social media sites to counter the narratives put forward by extremists, and create the space for the expression of contrary viewpoints and religious interpretations.w maintain laws that provide an effective defence against terrorist activity, including proscription of terrorist groups, terrorism prevention and investigation measures, and temporary exclusion orders, which enable the security services to manage the return of those who have fought illegally in foreign conflicts.w ensure we continue to provide the appropriate resources to the police and intelligence agencies to meet the threat, including of cyber attack.w ensure efforts to tackle terrorism do not stigmatise or alienate muslims or any other ethnic or faith group, and that government supports communities to help prevent those at risk of radicalisation from being drawn into illegal activity.w review the process of assessing threats against different ethnic and religious communities to ensure all groups in the uk are properly protected.9.8 an effective approach to reducing drug harmfor too long the debate about effective ways to reduce theharm caused by drugs has been distorted by political prejudice. around the world, countries are trialling new approaches that are reducing drug harm, improving lives, reducing addiction and saving taxpayers money. in the uk we have made good progress on treatment but we continue to give 80,000 people a year a criminal record for drug possession, blighting their employment chances, and we still imprison 1,000 people a year for personal possession when they are not charged with dealing or any other offence.we will:w adopt the approach used in portugal where those arrested for possession of drugs for personal use are diverted into treatment, education or civil penalties that do not attract a criminal record.w as a first step towards reforming the system, legislate to end the use of imprisonment for possession of drugs for personal1259secure communities | policing, justice and the border force126use, diverting resources towards tackling organised drug crimeinstead.w continue to apply severe penalties to those who manufacture,import or deal in illegal drugs, and clamp down on those whoproduce and sell unregulated chemical highs.w establish a review to assess the effectiveness of the cannabislegalisation experiments in the united states and uruguay inrelation to public health and criminal activity.w legislate to make the advisory council on the misuse of drugsindependent in setting the classification of drugs, while remainingaccountable to parliament and the wider public.w enable doctors to prescribe cannabis for medicinal use.w put the department of health rather than the home office incharge of drug policy.9.9 restoring confidence in our bordersthe uk secures many benefits from immigration, which boosts our economy and helps staff our public services, especially our nhs.but we need to tackle the weaknesses in our immigration system, which threatened to undermine confidence in it. that is why we have led work fully to restore border checks on entry and exit. we need to improve the administration of our system so we deal with asylum claims and visa applications promptly and return those who do not have a valid claim to be in the uk. then we can start to rebuild an open, tolerant britain.we will:w complete the restoration of full entry and exit checks at our borders, to rebuild confidence in immigration control, and allow targeting of resources at those who overstay their visas.w speed up the processing of asylum claims, reducing the time genuine refugees have to wait before they can settle into life in the uk and making it easier to remove those who do not have a right to be here. we will require working age asylum seekers who have waited more than six months for their claim to be processed to seek work like other benefit claimants, and only to receive benefits if they are unable to do so. we will end the use of the azure card for administering benefits in the asylum system.w double the number of inspections on employers to ensure all statutory employment legislation is being respected.w separate students within official immigration statistics, while taking tough action against any educational institution that allows abuse of the student route into the uk.w present to parliament an annual assessment of skill and labourliberal democrat manifesto 2015market shortfalls and surpluses and their impact on the economy, public services and local communities, together with an audit report on the migration control system, allowing full parliamentary oversight of britains migration policies.w continue requirements for all new claimants for jobseekers allowance (jsa) to have their english language skills assessed, with jsa then being conditional on attending english language courses for those whose english is poor.w encourage schools with high numbers of children with english as a second language to host english lessons for parents.1279secure communities | policing, justice and the border force128power to the peopledevolution,democracy andcitizenshipfor freedom to be meaningful, people need thepower not just to make decisions about theirown lives, but about the way their country, their community, their workplace and more are run.liberal democrats have made a good start on modernising and decentralising the state. but wewere thwarted in some of our attempts to reformpolitics. when it came to reforming the house 1 of lords and giving citizens a stronger voicewith fair votes, our proposals were blocked. we still believe these are essential changes and will continue our work to deliver them.1290130for freedom to be meaningful, people need the power not just to make decisions about their own lives, but about the way their country, their community, their workplace and more are run.liberal democrats have made a good start on modernising and decentralising the state. we have taken away the prime ministers power to call elections. we have improved parliament with more powers for backbenchers and more internal democracy. we have devolved power to councils and communities. we have enacted the biggest transfer of fiscal power from westminster to scotland in three hundred years. we have supported employee democracy and the mutuals movement.but we were thwarted in some of our attempts to reform politics. when it came to reforming the house of lords and giving citizens a stronger voice with fair votes, our proposals were blocked. we still believe these are essential changes and will continue our work to deliver them.liberal democrat manifesto 2015a record of deliverya promise of morepassed a lobbying act to introduce a register of consultant lobbyists and curb the influence of special interest money in electionsfixed term parliaments, taking away a prime ministers power to call elections when it suits their own partynew powers for scotland, wales and northern ireland, including more financial devolution than ever beforedevolved 7 billion of funding for transport and economic growth to local areas in england.10.1 better politicsbetter democracy with a fair voting system in local government and at westminster and votes at 16deliver on our promises to scotland in full, devolve more powers to wales, and work for a shared future in northern irelandmeet the needs of england with devolution on demand, letting local areas take control of the services that matter most to themunfair votes, overcentralisation of decision-making, the power of patronage and the influence of powerful corporate lobbies mean ordinary citizens and local communities are too often excluded and sidelined in politics today. we need to reform british politics to make it more representative and more empowering of our citizens so it commands greater public confidence.we will:w take big money out of politics by capping donations to political parties at 10,000 per person each year, and introducing wider reforms to party funding along the lines of the 2011 report of the committee on standards in public life, funded from savings from existing government spending on politics.w protect the rights of trade union members to have their131get big money out of politics with a 10,000 cap on donations as part of wider funding reform10power to the people | devolution, democracy and citizenship132subscriptions, including political levies, deducted from their salary, and strengthen members political freedoms by letting them choose which political party they wish to support through such automatic payments. we will encourage wider participation in trade union ballots through electronic voting.w introduce votes at age 16 for elections and referendums across the uk, and make it easier to register to vote in schools and colleges.w reform the house of lords with a proper democratic mandate, starting from the proposals in the 2012 bill.w reform our voting systems for elections to local government and westminster to ensure more proportional representation. wewill introduce the single transferable vote for local government elections in england and for electing mps across the uk. we will reduce the number of mps but only as part of the introduction of a reformed, fair, voting system.w cancel the boundary review due to report in 2018. while new constituencies would need to be established for a new voting system, we believe constituency boundary reviews should respect natural geographical communities, with greater flexibility for the boundary commission to deviate from exact equality to take account of community ties and continuity of representation.w explore options to strengthen and simplify the voting rights of uk citizens living abroad and address disenfranchisement experienced by some.w work with the broadcasters to formalise the process for leaders' debates in general elections, helping ensure they happen and setting a clear threshold for those eligible to participate.w strengthen and expand the lobbying register and prohibit mps from accepting paid lobbying work. we will consider carefully the work of the independent reviewer into the impact of third party spending regulations to ensure the right balance has been struck. we will also remove the discrimination against third parties by requiring political parties to include the cost of staffing in their national expense limits in the same way as third parties now do.to reform parliament in particular we will:w strengthen the role of mps in amending the budget and scrutinising government spending proposals.w make parliament more family-friendly, and establish a review to pave the way for mp jobsharing arrangements.w implement a house business committee to ensure that parliament and not the executive decides the parliamentary timetable, ending the talking out of private members business. building on the wright committee recommendations of 2009, and experiencesliberal democrat manifesto 2015of coalition, we will conduct a full review of parliamentary procedures, which should formally recognise individual political parties not just government and opposition.10.2 a decentralised but united kingdomliberal democrats have a proud record of leading the way on giving greater powers to the nations of the uk. liberal democrat ministers were the ones to lead the 2012 scotland act and the 2014 wales act through parliament, transferring more financial autonomy to scotland than ever before, and wales first tax powers. and in the last months, we have given the governments of scotland, wales and northern ireland the power to lower the voting age to 16.now we need go further. we must deliver on the promises made to the people of scotland and the rest of the uk to further decentralise power. in short, we will deliver home rule to each of the nations of a strong, federal united kingdom.constitutional change has taken place rapidly. we now need to make sure all the new arrangements work together coherently and we will therefore establish a uk constitutional convention, made up from representatives of the political parties, academia, civic society and members of the public, tasked with producing a full written constitution for the uk, to report within two years.there are many powers that we think should be devolved on an equal basis to the existing parliaments and assemblies. we will transfer power to:w borrowforinvestment.w managethecrownestateseconomicassets.w control a range of benefits for older people, carers and disabledpeople.scotlandafter the independence referendum, the smith commission brought scotlands five main parties together to agree what further powers should be assigned to the scottish parliament. liberal democrats ensured the package of powers reflects scotlands key priorities.the scottish parliament should raise in tax more than half of what it spends in its budget. a scottish welfare system should allow the scottish parliament to change the benefits regime where there is specific scottish need or priority, with a starting budget of around 3 billion.these powers and more will deliver for the scottish people: an13310power to the people | devolution, democracy and citizenshipempowered and accountable scottish parliament in a strong and secure united kingdom.we will deliver home rule for scotland by implementing the smith commission proposals in full in the first session of the next parliament. we will continue to make the case for powers currently held at westminster and holyrood to be transferred directly to local government where appropriate.waleswe endorse the recent st. davids day announcement and will implement it in full, devolving powers over energy, ports, local elections, broadcasting and more, and implementing a reserved powers model.but this announcement does not go far enough. liberal democrats will go further and deliver proper home rule for wales and a welsh parliament by:w implementing the remaining silk part 1 proposals on financial powers for wales. we will consider the work of the governments review on devolution of air passenger duty (apd), with a view to devolving long-haul apd.w implementing the silk part 2 proposals by: transferring powers from the uk parliament to the nationalassembly over s4c, sewerage, transport, teachers pay, youth justice, policing and in the longer term other justice powers. devolving funding of network rail in relation to the wales network. strengthening the capacity of the national assembly to scrutinise legislation and hold the welsh government to account.w allowing the welsh government to set its own bank holidays. w providing for a welsh parliament, preventing westminster frombeing able to override wales on devolved matters, and devolving the power to amend electoral arrangements for the assembly and local elections in wales with a two thirds majority.w giving the childrens commissioner for wales the power to examine issues that affect children in wales but are not within the control of the welsh government.in addition, to help create jobs and boost growth in wales, we will abolish the economically distorting tolls on the severn bridge once the debts are paid off.134liberal democrat manifesto 2015northern irelandliberal democrats wish to see a permanently peaceful, stable, non-sectarian and truly democratic society in northern ireland. we will work constructively with the political parties in northern ireland and with the irish government to ensure the political stability ofthe northern ireland assembly and other institutions of the belfast agreement. to grow the economy, tackle social exclusion, overcome inequality and deliver efficiencies in public services, liberal democrats will support policies and initiatives that promote sharing over separation and counter the cost of division. a key aspect ofthis is dealing with the legacy of the past. the stormont house agreement represents another stage in the intensive work necessary to build long-term peace, stability and prosperity in northern ireland.in government we delivered on the commitment to enable the devolution of corporation tax to northern ireland by april 2017. we will continue to work with all parties to implement the full package of measures in the stormont house agreement and address outstanding issues. we will build on this by:w keeping under review the prospect of further devolution of fiscal powers to the northern ireland assembly and other powers that would improve the financial accountability of the assembly.w promoting a strong mechanism for working constructively with civic society in northern ireland.w working to ensure the interface is smooth and effective between national security and counter-terrorism policing on the one hand, and local policing and criminal justice activities on the other.w supporting changes to the powers and internal mechanisms of the northern ireland assembly that reinforce the development of normal, democratic principles and enhances the creation of a shared future beyond sectarianism and division.w working with the political parties in northern ireland to tackle the cost of division and ensuring all government policies in northern ireland support the aim of a genuine shared future for all.englanddevolution of power to scotland, wales and northern ireland has implications for the uk parliament and its dual role in legislating for england as well as the federal uk. it is possible that a future uk government could use the support of mps representing scotland, wales or northern ireland to secure the passage of legislationthat only affects england, even if the majority in england were opposed. this would be a key issue for our proposed constitutional convention to address.liberal democrats believe an english-only stage in legislation13510power to the people | devolution, democracy and citizenship136affecting england should be considered, so english mps can have a separate say on laws that only affect england. however, this would need to be on a proportional basis, genuinely reflecting the balance of opinion in england, not the distorted picture generated by the first past the post system.beyond parliament, there is much to change to improve the way communities in england are governed. by returning power to the villages, towns, cities and regions of england we can drive growth, improve public services and give people freedom to run their own lives.to rejuvenate local government in england, we will:w reduce the powers of ministers to interfere in democratically elected local government.w remove the requirement to hold local referenda for council tax changes, ensuring councillors are properly accountable for their decisions by introducing fair votes.w build on the success of city deals and growth deals to devolve more power and resources to groups of local authorities and local enterprise partnerships, starting with back-to-work support.w establish a government process to deliver greater devolutionof financial responsibility to english local authorities, and any new devolved bodies in england, building on the work of the independent commission on local government finance. any changes must balance the objectives of more local autonomy and fair equalisation between communities.in some areas of england there is an even greater appetite for powers, but not every part of the country wants to move at the same speed and there cannot be a one-size-fits-all approach. we will therefore introduce devolution on demand, enabling even greater devolution of powers from westminster to councils or groups of councils working together  for example to a cornish assembly.fundingthe nations of the united kingdom have long had different needs with regard to funding. the barnett formula is the mechanism used to adjust spending allocations across the uk.the liberal democrats have already delivered a substantial extension of financial powers to the nations of the uk and we will devolve further fiscal powers to the devolved governments. in order to ensure reliable funding, we will retain the barnett formula as theliberal democrat manifesto 2015basis for future spending allocations for scotland and northern ireland. this will protect the individual nations budgets from external shocks like the recent global drop in the price of oil. we recognise the findings of the holtham commission that the current formula underfunds wales and will commission work to update this analysis. we will address the imbalance by immediately entrenching a barnett floor set at a level that reflects the need for wales to be funded fairly, and seek over a parliament to increase the welsh block grant to an equitable level.10.3 everyday democracyto lead a fulfilled life, people need power over more than just their government. liberal democrats will spread democracy in everyday life by encouraging mutuals, cooperatives, and employee participation and by increasing the opportunities for people to take democratic control over the services on which they rely. we will encourage citizens to engage in practical social action, seeing government as an enabler and facilitator rather than just a commissioner and provider of services.we will:w aim to increase the number of neighbourhood, community and parish councils and promote tenant management in social housing.w encourage employers to promote employee participation and employee ownership, aiming to increase further the proportion of gdp in employee-owned businesses. we will change company law to permit a german-style two-tier board structure to include employees.w introduce mandatory arbitration for strikes likely to cause widespread public disruption, enabling us to defend workers rights to strike while ensuring continued service in essential public services.w strengthenworkerparticipationindecision-making,including staff representation on remuneration committees, and the right for employees who collectively own 5% of a company to be represented on the board.w give football fans a greater say in how their clubs are run by encouraging the reform of football governance rules to promote engagement between clubs and supporters.w support local libraries and ensure any libraries under threat of closure are offered first for transfer to the local community.w spread mutual structures and employee participation through the public sector.13710power to the people | devolution, democracy and citizenshipreforming the house of lords789the current size of the house of lords450under liberal democrat reforms138liberal democrat manifesto 2015w strengthen community rights to run local public services, and protect community assets like pubs by bringing forward a community right to buy. we will ensure planning permission is required to convert a pub into alternative uses.w support social investment, ensuring charities and social enterprises can access the support and finance they need to develop and deliver innovative, sustainable solutions to challenges in their communities.10.4 protecting the space for democratic debatewe recognise the importance of a plural and diverse media, free from state influence or from monopolistic or dominant market control, in guaranteeing a vibrant national conversation. we will therefore reform the existing arrangements for safeguarding plurality in the media broadly in line with the recommendations of the 2014 lords communications select committee report.we will:w give lead responsibility to ofcom and enable it to conduct reviews periodically, as well as when triggered by proposed mergers and acquisitions, and enable ofcom to set down conditions to prevent the reach of any media company damaging the public interest.w ensure any conditions or requirements that ofcom lays down following a plurality review can only be vetoed or interfered with by a minister after a vote of both houses of parliament.w use a variety of measures to ensure that there is a vibrant local and hyperlocal media to help inform citizens about their local area and their local politics, including: redirecting the current subsidies for local tv, which have failed to contribute significantly to cultural life. extending ofcoms community radio grant support to online hyperlocals, and allowing non-profit local media outlets to obtain charitable status where the public interest is being served.10139power to the people | devolution, democracy and citizenship140britain in the worldglobal action for security and prosperityin a more globalised, interdependent world, freedom for individuals is not best protected solely by the nation state. corporations, banks and markets now operate across the globewith little respect for national borders. climate change, one of the greatest challenges of our age, is by its nature global. and criminals, hackers and terrorists now operate across borders, too. it is in the interests of all countries to create a system of international law and governance, both treaty-based and multilateral, at the global level. we will ensure britain actively and constructively works with our allies and partners in the european union, commonwealth, un and nato to engage with and develop policy responses when liberal internationalism and the rules-based system are challenged.11411142liberal democrats are internationalists because we respect the rights of human beings wherever they live and understand that by working together countries can achieve more than they can alone. this is particularly true for a country like the uk with a rich web of global relationships, which gives it the potential to wield greater influence than its economic or military power alone would permit.in a more globalised, interdependent world, freedom for individuals is not best protected solely by the nation state. corporations, banks and markets now operate across the globe with little respect for national borders. climate change, one of the greatest challenges of our age, is by its nature global. and criminals, hackers and terrorists now operate across borders, too. it is in the interests of all countries to create a system of international law and governance, both treaty-based and multilateral, at the global level.liberal democrats have worked tirelessly in government to keep britain at the heart of the european union, to secure the best deal for british citizens. our ministers have represented the uk across the world on vital issues from climate change to nuclear disarmament and secured agreements that will keep us all safer, not least the international arms trade treaty. we have stood up for human rights, the rule of international law and humanitarian aid, delivering for the first time on the 40 year old un ambition for developed countries to spend 0.7% of national income as official development assistance.we will ensure britain actively and constructively works with our allies and partners in the european union, commonwealth, un and nato to engage with and develop policy responses when liberal internationalism and the rules-based system are challenged.liberal democrat manifesto 2015a record of deliverya promise of moreensure the 2015 sustainable development goals aim to end poverty, protect the environment and leave no one behindincreased aid spending to 0.7% of national income, and guaranteed this in lawsecured a record 23.9 billion last year from clamping down on tax evasion, avoidance and fraud, and won g8 agreement on transparency on the real owners of businessespassed a law to guarantee a referendum before britain passes any more powers to the euagreed an ambitious eu target of 40% cuts to carbon emissions by 2030, and secured rio+20 agreements on sustainable developmentsupported our armed forces and veterans, enshrining the armed forces covenant in lawimprove tax transparency including in low-income countries by extending country-by-country reporting from banks and extractive industries to all uk listed companiesensure britain plays a constructive part in the european union and any referendum triggered by the eu act is on the big question: in or outwork to secure a binding global agreement on cutting emissions, and a stronger commitment within the eu to a 50% reduction by 2030focus on ensuring our armed forces have the training and equipment they need for the threats of today and end continuous nuclear weapon patrols11.1 working for peace and security across the worldfrom the recent collapse of talks between israelis and palestinians to russian interference in ukraine, this is a challenging time for peace and security across the world. at times like these we need to redouble our diplomatic efforts and work closely with our eu and nato partners to promote an active, rights-based foreign policy for our mutual defence.the uk has a proud record of playing a leading role in the european union and in international institutions like the un, nato and the commonwealth and should continue to do so, wherever possible promoting our values of freedom and opportunity for all.14311britain in the world | global action for security and prosperity144w use all aspects of government policy  trade, aid and diplomacy as well as military cooperation  to focus uk policy on conflict prevention. this will require a joint approach across the mod, fco, dfid and other departments, and we will continue to assess uk government actions for their impacts on conflict prevention and security. this will be a priority within the 2015 strategic defence and security review (sdsr), which should begin immediately after the election.w engage with and strengthen multilateral un and treaty-based institutions worldwide.w support the un principle of responsibility to protect. this principle focuses on the security of individuals, rather than states.w improve control of arms exports by: implementing a policy of presumption of denial for armsexports to countries listed as countries of concern in theforeign offices annual human rights report. requiring end-user certification on all future arms exportlicenses with an annual report to parliament on this certification.should all these institutions and policies fail, we recognise it will be necessary to consider military interventions to protect ourselves and fulfil our international obligations. however in these circumstances, liberal democrats believe the uk should intervene only when there is a clear legal and/or humanitarian case, endorsed by a vote in parliament, working within the remit of international institutions wherever and whenever possible.in response to current major conflicts worldwide, we will:w promote democracy and stability in ukraine and neighbouring countries against an increasingly assertive russia. we will work closely with eu and other international partners to exert maximum economic and political pressure on russia to stop interfering in the affairs of sovereign eastern european nations, and will stand by our obligations under the nato treaty in the event of threatsto nato member states. we will work with the eu to develop an eu energy strategy that will reduce reliance on russias energy supplies.w continue to work with international partners  western,african and arab  to tackle islamic fanaticism embodied by organisations like the so-called islamic state (is) in iraq and syria and boko haram in nigeria. these extremist organisations pervert islam and carry out appalling atrocities against muslims as well aswe will:liberal democrat manifesto 2015non-muslims. this is a generational challenge that will take time and patience. we favour broadening the international coalition against is.w recognising that airstrikes alone will not defeat is, continue a comprehensive approach, in compliance with international law, to supporting the iraqi government in standing against is, including: assistance in strengthening its democratic institutions. training the iraqi security forces and kurdish peshmergafighters. humanitarian relief to help alleviate the suffering ofdisplaced syrians and iraqis.w support the moderate opposition in syria, who are fighting bothpresident bashar al-assad and is. we will continue to push for an inclusive political transition in syria, which would enable syrian moderates from all sides to unite against extremism and tyranny.w remain committed to a negotiated peace settlement to the israeli-palestinian conflict, which includes a two-state solution. we condemn disproportionate force used by all sides. we condemn hamas rocket attacks and other targeting of israeli civilians. we condemn israels continued illegal policy of settlement expansion, which undermines the possibility of a two- state solution. we support recognition of the independent state of palestine as and when it will help the prospect of a two-state solution.w support multilateral negotiations to stop iran obtaining nuclear weapons. we will continue to seek normalisation of our diplomatic relations with iran, including reopening the british embassy in tehran and promoting peaceful dialogue between iran and saudi arabia.11.2 our armed forces and security servicesthe uk must be able to defend itself and the territories for which it has responsibility, support its neighbours and allies, and engage in humanitarian intervention. many of the security challenges the uk faces are shared by our partners and allies in the eu and nato and the uk is more effective and more resilient when we work closely with those partners.liberal democrats are clear that the security offered by our continued membership of the eu is more crucial than ever, as are our bilateral relationships with our key european allies. we favour greater integration of military capabilities and procurement to address common problems, to overcome economic constraints and to maintain a full spectrum of defence capabilities. to achieve this, we will build on the treaty-based arrangements we have established14511britain in the world | global action for security and prosperityand extend this cooperation to other suitable european partners. liberal democrats are committed to meeting our national andinternational obligations in security and defence. this is why in government over the last five years we met the nato commitment to spend 2% of our gdp on defence, most recently restated inthe readiness action plan and defence industrial pledge at the wales nato summit in 2014. we are committed to completing a comprehensive strategic defence and security review early in the next parliament to inform future defence spending decisions. we recognise that the world has changed fundamentally since the last such review. it is vital that our real security and defence needs and international obligations are considered in the sdsr, and this is why we wish to move towards a single security budget.we will:w conductastrategicdefenceandsecurityreviewinwhichwe will revisit and update the future force 2020 vision and ensure the capabilities we are invested in are relevant for keeping britain safe.w usethesdsrtoestablishasinglesecuritybudget,includingnot just conventional defence spending but the work of our security agencies, cyber defences and soft power interventions. the single security budget will be distributed by the sdsr process, as part of an overall spending review. this integrated approach will ensure spending choices follow the capabilities we need, not traditional departmental silos.w maintainstrongandeffectivearmedforcesandthecapabilityto deploy rapidly expeditionary forces.w setlong-termbudgetstoinvestintherightequipmentatcompetitive prices.w recognisetheexpansionofwarfareintothecybersphere,by investing in our security and intelligence services and acting to counter cyber attacks.w remainfullyengagedininternationalnucleardisarmamentefforts. w stepdownthenuclearladderbyprocuringfewervanguard successor submarines and moving from continuous at seadeterrence to a contingency posture of regular patrols, enablinga surge to armed patrols when the international security context makes this appropriate. this would help us to fulfil our nuclear non-proliferation treaty commitments and reduce the uk nuclear warhead stockpile.w workfornewglobalstandardstoendtheuseofconventional explosive weapons with wide-area effects in populated areas.w promoteeuropeandefenceintegrationwhereappropriateby enhancing european defence industry co-operation.146liberal democrat manifesto 2015liberal democrats recognise the vital role the uks armed forces play in the defence of the nation and believe that it is the role of government to safeguard the interests of service personnel and veterans. we strongly support the armed forces covenant, now enshrined in law in the 2011 armed forces act. we also propose:w transferring the office of the veterans minister to the cabinet office, so that the services of all departments can be marshalled in support of veterans and creating a post of veterans commissioner.w improving support for personnel and veterans with mental health problems, including alcohol dependency.w strengtheninglocalmilitarycovenantsbydefiningmoreexacting guidelines and ensuring best practice is rolled out across all local authorities.the government in 2011 set a target for increasing the size of the reserves to 30,000 but it is significantly behind in achieving this goal, with continued problems of retention. we acknowledge the different pressures that reserves face and propose that:w emphasis be put on improving retention and training of reserves at current levels.w employers be required to offer two weeks unpaid leave annually to assist reserves attending training camps.11.3 britain in europe: prosperity and reformbritains membership of the eu is essential for creating a stronger economy and for projecting influence in the world. millions of british jobs are linked to our trade with the eu, and being in europe puts us on a more equal footing when negotiating trade deals with global players like the usa and china and in countering security threats.a modernised eu is crucial to responding to the global challenges britain faces, whether they are climate change, cross-border crime and terrorism, or conflict.if the uk were to leave the eu, trade rules would be made without us, our voice would not be heard in climate change negotiations and our borders would be more vulnerable. there is no doubt the uk would be poorer and weaker if we walked away from our closest neighbours and most trusted allies and left the eu.but that does not mean that the institutions and policies ofthe european union are perfect and do not need reform. liberal democrats are the party of reform whether that is in westminster, holyrood, the senedd or in local councils and the eu is no exception.14711britain in the world | global action for security and prosperitybritish exports50.5% 49.5% european union rest of the worldthe european union is the biggest export market for british goods.148liberal democrat manifesto 2015liberal democrats in government have already secured significant reforms like cutting the eu budget by 30 billion and reforming the common fisheries policy, ending the discardingof usable fish. we have also shifted the balance of eu spending towards jobs, growth and innovation. only by remaining fully engaged in the eu can we deliver the further reforms that are urgently needed not only for the uk, but also for the rest of the eu.we will:w work to deepen the eu single market in the energy sector, in the digital economy and for services. we will boost british exports by scrapping national barriers to british firms trading online and by concluding ambitious eu trade agreements with key markets like japan and india. we will implement the recommendations made by michael moore mp in october 2014, including publishing an annual european business white paper and appointing an eu business minister to lead this competitiveness agenda.w support negotiations at the world trade organisation as well as an ambitious transatlantic trade and investment partnership (ttip) between the eu and the usa, which could bring benefits of up to 10 billion a year to the british economy. we will only support an agreement that upholds eu standards of consumer, employee and environmental protection, and allows us to determine how nhs services are provided.w work to reform the eu to make it more efficient, reducing the proportion of the eu budget spent on the common agricultural policy, abolishing unnecessary eu institutions like the european economic and social committee and scrapping the second seat of the european parliament in strasbourg.w continue to reduce the burden of eu legislation on business by curbing unnecessary red tape, exempting small businesses from eu rules where possible and defending the uk opt-out to the working time directive.w increase the accountability of the eu by enhancing the role of national parliaments in scrutinising eu decision-making and by giving a combined majority of national parliaments the automatic ability to block unwanted legislation. we will strengthen uk scrutiny of european legislation and positions taken by british ministers in europe including by proposing an explicit role for british parliamentary select committees.w hold an in/out referendum when there is next any treaty change involving a material transfer of sovereignty from the uk to the eu. liberal democrats will campaign for the uk to remain in the european union when that referendum comes.w reinforce the eus tools for tackling cross border crime,14911britain in the world | global action for security and prosperitystrengthening the role of the european cyber crime centre and reforming the european arrest warrant to prevent miscarriages of justice while ensuring swift delivery of justice.w cooperatewithothereuropeancountriestoaddress environmental threats and tackle climate change by securing agreement to reduce greenhouse gas emissions by 50% by 2030 and developing the eu energy union.w support eu free movement, which is hugely beneficial tomillions of british citizens living in other european countriesas well as to the british economy and the public sector, for example the thousands of european health workers who makea vital contribution to the running of the nhs. we will preventany perceived right to claim by tightening benefit rules for eu migrants, including reducing, and ultimately abolishing, payment of child benefit to children who are not resident in the uk. we will also lengthen transitional controls for new eu member countries, and eliminate loopholes.w cooperatewithothereuropeancountriestoaddressthe pressure of migration across the mediterranean. we will push for more effective eu measures to prevent the tragic loss of life for many crossing the mediterranean, including through greater cooperation with anti-human-trafficking operations.w continue to work closely with other eu governments on foreign policy issues towards russia, ukraine, the middle east and north africa. we will build on our already close defence cooperation with france, the netherlands, the nordic states and other european countries, as the most reliable basis for british security.11.4 international developmentin government, liberal democrats have led the way on international development and aid. we have worked to end the use of rape as a weapon of war. we have led international efforts to tackle the ebola crisis in sierra leone and, through investment in the global alliance for vaccines and immunisations (gavi), britain is a global leader in preventing communicable diseases.now, we need to build on progress made since the agreement of the millennium development goals and work to eliminate absolute poverty by 2030  through aid but also through economic development.we will:w developawhole-governmentapproachtodevelopment.w continue to promote private sector economic development,150ensuring this benefits local people and small businesses not justliberal democrat manifesto 2015multinational corporations. we will lead international action to ensure global companies pay fair taxes in the developing countries in which they operate, including tightening anti-tax haven rules and requiring large companies to publish their tax payments and profits for each country in which they operate.w maintainourcommitmenttospend0.7%ofukgrossnational income on overseas development, which the international development act 2015, introduced by a liberal democrat, now enshrines in law. we will adhere to the oecds definition of what activities qualify.w conductafullbilateralandmultilateralaidreviewtoensurethatthe department for international development continues to work in the right places and through the right channels.w continuebuildingtheresilienceofpoorercountriestoresistfuture disasters, investing in healthcare and infrastructure and training emergency response volunteers, and respond generously to humanitarian crises wherever they may occur.w worktoensurethesustainabledevelopmentgoalsaimto: safeguard the sustainability of the planet. leave no one behind, helping the most vulnerable as well asimproving average living standards. we will ensure people do not suffer discrimination or disadvantage because of gender, sexual orientation, disability or ethnic origin. eliminate absolute poverty by 2030.w investtoeliminatewithinagenerationpreventablediseasesliketb,hiv and malaria and explore new ways to support public and private research and development into treatment for these and other deadly diseases and infections.15111britain in the world | global action for security and prosperity152w create a new civil society partnership scheme to buildlinks between peoples in rich and poor countries, including partnerships between communities, trade unions or emergency services.11.5 international action on the environmentthe open and internationalist approach liberal democratshave always adopted is particularly crucial when it comes to environmental policy. pollution does not respect national borders, and wildlife and ecosystems are not constrained by political boundaries. challenges like climate change and deforestation are too massive for individual countries to tackle alone.we will:w continue pushing for a 50% reduction in eu greenhouse gas emissions by 2030 and the greater use of eu funds to support low-carbon investments, while ensuring the uk meets its own climate commitments and plays a leadership role in efforts to combat climate change.w work to secure agreement on a global climate treaty at the 2015 un climate conference, supported by a well-financed green climate fund to assist poorer countries to tackle and adapt to climate change.w work with regulatory bodies and financial investors to establish a global reporting standard for fossil fuel companies on the potential impact of future restrictions on carbon emissions on their asset base.w providegreaterresourcesforinternationalenvironmental cooperation, particularly on actions to tackle illegal trade in timber, wildlife and fish.w argue for an eu and global target of halting net global deforestation by 2020  including supporting better forest law enforcement and governance and sustainable agriculture, closing loopholes in the eu timber regulation and ensuring that by 2020 only legal and sustainable timber products can be sold in the uk.w ensure uk and eu development aid, free trade and investment agreements support environmental goals and sustainable investment, including maintaining the uks international climate fund and supporting direct bilateral programmes with developing countries on climate change.w create a one million square kilometre southern atlantic ocean reserve.w push for the creation of a marine nature reserve in the arctic ocean, promote the highest possible environmental standardsliberal democrat manifesto 2015for uk companies operating in the region and press for a ban on eu-flagged vessels undertaking industrial fishing in the previously unfished areas of the arctic.11.6 standing up for liberal valuesliberal democrats believe british foreign policy and international aid should seek to advance human rights and democracy throughout the world. we believe all people  regardless of ethnicity, disability, age, belief, gender or sexual orientation  deserve a freer, fairer and more prosperous world.we will:w continue to support free media and a free and open internet around the world, championing the free flow of information.w maintain funding to bbc world service, bbc monitoring and the british council.w develop a comprehensive strategy for promoting the decriminalisation of homosexuality around the world, and advancing the cause of lgbt+ rights.w prioritise support, protection and equal rights for women and girls, which is essential for effective, sustainable economic development. we will pursue an international gender equality strategy, work to secure womens rights to education and freedom from forced marriage; and aim to end female genital mutilation worldwide within a generation.w extend existing reporting rules to establish consistent requirements on all large uk companies to report on the social, environmental and human rights impacts of their activities and those of their supply chains.the recent islamist extremist attacks on journalists in europe are a sharp reminder of the need to protect freedom of speech and belief internationally. we will appoint an ambassador-level champion for freedom of belief to drive british diplomatic efforts in this field, and we will campaign for the abolition of blasphemy, sedition, apostasy and criminal libel laws worldwide, having already been responsible for ending them in this country.11153britain in the world | global action for security and prosperitymanifesto 2015 index91 - 99 2973 - 74 80106 106 23, 61 35105 - 1062624 - 25 24 - 25 24 - 25 35, 1084342411242520 - 26, 31 - 35, 61, 145 - 14872 - 74 74 - 75 243540 - 41102 - 11326-27, 82-85, 150 48 - 49154aaffordable housing airportsalcoholanimal welfare anti-muslim hate anti-semitism apprenticeships arts & culturebblack, asian & minority ethnic banking bank of england  competition  levy  separationbbcbenefits  housing benefit  working age  universal credit border checksbritish business bank businessccancercarerscatapult centres channel 4 childcarecivil liberties climate change consumer rightsliberal democrat manifesto 201578 - 87 33 - 35 115 - 124 73, 86, 9515 - 19143 - 14515 - 1972129 - 13024, 131 - 135 33-34 111 - 113 111 - 11346 - 47, 106 - 107 123 - 12453 - 21 - 51 - 130 4655 35 612929 -30 -3113331 - 145-14831 31- 13433, 140, 143,81 - 82 1191988 - 89 8248, 105, 135 5693 - 94 1057224, 27, 9963 - 75 33105, 151countrysidecreative industriescrimecyclingddebtdefencedeficitdementiademocratic reform devolutiondigitaldigital bill of rights disabilitiesdrug reformeearly yearseconomyeducationelectoral reform employment tribunal fees energy electricity  low carbon  nuclear  unconventional gas englandeuropeffarmingfgmfiscal rules five green laws flooding footballfree school mealsggarden citiesgender pay gapgp accessgreen investment bank hhealth heritage homophobia15528, 8531 - 33, 124 - 125 2319, 27 - 31142 - 143 143140 - 143141 - 142140 -142 148 - 151122 104-105, 151 13545-46, 752435, 108 - 109, 137 64 - 693524, 6174, 78 - 81, 88 - 89, 150 65 - 66131, 1334711811812985 - 86, 150 119-121191927 - 29, 86 52, 5527 - 29 80 - 81 242651 - 58156hs2iimmigrationindustrial strategyinfrastructureinternational islamic state  israel - palestine  nato russia - ukraine  united nations international aid and development llegal aidlgbt+librariesliving wagelocal enterprise partnershipsmmedia reformmental healthmuseums and galleriesnnational collegesnaturenhs budgetnorthern irelandppensionspolicepolice and crime commissioners political donationspollutionprison reformpublic sector paypublic spendingpublic transportpupil premiumrrailrecyclingregional growth fund regulatory policy committeesschoolsliberal democrat manifesto 201524, 33, 57131 - 1324523-24, 34 -35, 61, 7569 - 71, 74 - 75 46 - 4717, 19264025, 40 95, 99 40274039 - 40 264052 - 58 12373 - 74 33129 - 130, 150 14471, 14735, 4560131 - 132 4541 - 425946sciencescotlandshared parental leave skillssocial carespare room subsidyspending reviewttax business tax  capital gains tax  corporation tax  council tax  evasion and avoidance  green taxes  high value property levy  income tax  land value tax  national insurance teachersterrorismtobaccotourismtrade unionstridentttiptv licenceuuniversitieswwaleswinter fuel paymentwork programmeyyoung persons discount cardzzero hours contracts157liberal democrat manifesto 2015this manifesto sets out liberal democrat policies and priorities for the united kingdom. the scottish and welsh liberal democrats set their own policy on devolved matters, and for those policy areas, the proposals here apply to england only. our sister party, the alliance party of northern ireland, makes its own policy on devolved issues in northern ireland.isbn 978-1-910763-02-5  march 2015 price: 7.50further copies may be obtained from:liberal democrat image, the workshop, 24 cheyne way farnborough, hampshire, gu14 8rxemail: info@libdemimage.co.uk website: www.libdemimage.co.ukthis manifesto can be found in alternative formats at our address: www.libdems.org.uk/manifesto.for further information on obtaining copies of this manifesto in alternative formats please visit: www.libdems.org.uk/contactpublished and promoted by tim gordon on behalf of the liberal democrats, both at 8-10 great george street, london sw1p 3aeprinted by: sarum colourview ltdunit 8 woodford centre, lysander way, salisbury, wiltshire, sp4 6budesigned & art directed by steven lawsongraphic artwork by william branton, batool abbas, elizabeth bradley and addie kosmaczewska158liberal democrat manifesto 2015159160liberal democrat manifesto 2015ukip 2015 manifesto >page2believe in britainnigel farage mepmay 7th presents the people of britain with an incredible opportunity.for the first time in 100 years, there is real change on the horizon. all you have to do is vote for it.political party manifestos are usually filled with arbitrary, over-ambitious targets and pledges to some special interest group here or there. ukip is different.in this document, which should inform your choice at this election, you will find serious, fully-costed policies that reflect what our party is all about: believing in our country.on the major issues of the day - immigration, the economy, our health service and living standards  the establishment parties have repeatedly and knowingly raised the expectations of the public, only to let us down, time and time again.in many ways, this is where ukip came from: a feeling that successive governments were no longer representing the will of the british people.now, there is something to vote for, if you believe in britain.if you believe that we are big enough to make our own laws, in our own parliament; if you believe we should have the sovereign right to control our own borders; if you believe that we should be fiscally responsible, and stop adding to our national debts and expecting our children and grandchildren to pay the bill, then we are the party for you.if you believe in these things and that in this year, the 800th anniversaryof magna carta, you believe we should seize the opportunity for real change in our politics; rebalance power from large corporations and big government institutions and put it back into the hands of the people of this country, then there really is only one choice.if you believe in britain, vote ukip on may 7th.believe in britaincontentseconomy 6 the nhs 14 pensions 20 childcare and the family 24 housing and the environment 32 energy 38 small business 42 fishing 48 crime and justice 52 local government 58 trade 62 honouring the military covenant 66 overseas aid 68 finance 72introduction to our manifesto5immigration10social care18welfare and disability22education28transport36employment40farming and the countryside46heritage and tourism50political reform56british culture60defence64foreign affairs67brexit70ukip 2015 manifesto >page4published and promoted by paul oakden, on behalf of the uk independence party, 1 king charles business park, old newton road, heathfield, newton abbot, devon, tq12 6ut. printed by imax design & print ltd, the old cart house. applesham farm, coombes, west sussex, bn15 0rpintroduction to our manifestosuzanne evansdeputy chairman, policyif only all politicians could believe in britain as ukip does. if onlythey could share our positive vision of britain as a proud, independentsovereign nation, a country respected on the world stage, a major player in global trade, with influence and authority when it comes to tackling the pressing international issues of the day.this manifesto is our blueprint for a britain released from the shackles of the interfering eu. this makes it markedly different to those of the other main parties. while we see a free, prosperous, healthy, international future for britain, their cowardice binds our country to a failing super-state that tells us what to do and does not listen to what we want.our manifesto also throws down the gauntlet to those who have ridiculed us, jeered at us and lied about our voters, our people and our policies. it tells the truth about what ukip stands for.it takes care of britains finances too. taxpayers could get so much better value for their money if we left the eu, made reasonable cuts to the foreign aid budget, replaced the unfair barnett formula, scrapped hs2, ended health tourism and cut the cost of government. these are our plans and they give us a budget to invest in britain the other parties can only dream of. without adding a penny to our burgeoning national debt, without cutting vital services and without raising taxes, we can, over the course of the next parliament: invest an extra 12 billion into the nhs; put 5.2 billion more into social care; build a dedicated military hospital and abolish hospital parking charges end income tax on the minimum wage; cut income taxes for middle earners; scrap inheritance tax; abolish the bedroom tax and increase the transferable personal tax allowance for married couples and civil partners fund 6,000 additional posts spread between the police service, the prison service and the border agency cut business rates for small businesses waive tuition fees for students taking a degree in science; technology; engineering;maths or medicine increase defence spending to 2 per cent of gdp to honour our nato obligations invest 1.5 billion into mental health and dementia services pay carers an extra 572 a year build 500 affordable rent homes every year and eight halfway house hostels for homeless veterans remove stamp duty on the first 250,000 for new homes built on brownfield sites.our fiscal plans identifying how we will fund these policies have been rigorously and independently assessed by the centre for economic and business research (cebr). the cebr has been extremely diligent and has challenged us frequently, so voters can be assured our manifesto commitments are sound and affordable.ours is an amazing country, but it could be better still. as mark reckless said when he joined ukip last year: we are more than just a star on someone elses flag.britain is great: if you believe this too, then believe in us and vote ukip.believe in britainbelievein britainukip believes the key to creating a successful, dynamic economy and a fair society lies in harnessing the ingenuity, resourcefulness and appetite for hard workof the british people.economyour willingness to take the axe to politically correct spending programmes makes us the one party that can stick to the treasurys deficit elimination plan, while cutting taxes and increasing spending on vital services such as the nhs and defence of our nation.patrick oflynn mepeconomy spokesmanukip 2015 manifesto >page6under previous governments, excessive rates of taxation havekilled incentives for people to create wealth and make the most of their talents.our approach to the economy revolves around restoring incentives for workers by cutting taxes and ending the current open door arrangement for european labour that has driven down wages in recent years.by the end of the next parliament, ukip will: raise the personal allowance to at least 13,000 so people can earn enough money to cover their basic living costs before the state starts to take income tax out of their pay packets. this will take those on minimum wage out of tax altogether abolish inheritance tax. assets bought out of taxed income should not be taxed again when their owners die. we will strike out the hated death tax. it hits the middle classes hardest, those who have worked to provide for their dependents, because the wealthiest almost always manage to avoid paying it raise the threshold for paying 40 per cent income tax to 55,000 and introduce a new intermediate tax rate of 30 per cent on incomes ranging between 43,500 and 55,000. a tax originally designed for high earners should not be levied on middle- income earners such as school teachers and senior nurses increase the transferable tax allowance for married couples and civil partners to 1,500.the longer term aspiration of a ukip government will be to create an income tax structure of a basic rate of 20 per cent, an intermediate rate of 30 per cent, and a top rate of 40 per cent, meaning income taxes will be flatter and lower. bringing down taxes on working people at the bottom and in the middle ranges of the income scale is our priority. in the longer term, we will aim to restore the personal allowance to those earning over 100,000 and make40 per cent the top rate of tax for all, as it used to be.vatoutside the eu, we will have control over vat. significantly, we will be able to deal with distortion imposed by eu legislation and zero-rate certain goods and services that have previously had vat charged on them. this means we can  and will - remove vat completely from repairs to listed buildings and sanitary products, for example.corporation tax dodgingit is grossly unfair that a few multi-national corporations have been able to access all the benefits of our thriving british consumer market without making a proper contribution to the costs of british society. the public has every right to be angry about this.ukip will not allow large companies to continue getting away with paying zero or negligible corporation tax in britain. we will bring this unfairness to an end.by restoring british tax sovereignty, which we lost when we signed up to the eu, we will end the practice of businesses paying tax in whichever eu or associated country they choose. our membership of the eu enables companies to avoid paying some uk taxes with impunity and we will close this loophole.we will also set up a treasury commission to monitor the effectiveness of the new diverted profits tax and bring in any further measures necessary to prevent large multinational corporations using aggressive tax avoidance schemes.believe in britainreducing the deficit, paying off our debtsyears of mismanagement by labour and conservative governments have left our public finances in a mess.the public sector deficit in 2014/15 is expected to be around 90 billion and our national debt close to 1.5 trillion, 500 billion more than it was when david cameron took over in 2010.this is a terrible legacy to leave our children and grandchildren. save 9 billion a year in direct net contributions to the european union budget by leaving the eu reduce the overseas aid budget from 0.7 per cent to 0.2 per cent of gni, matching the percentage contribution made by the usa. this change will be phased in so projects in progress can be completed and contractual obligations met. annual savings will increase to 11 billion by 2019/20 and money for bi- lateral aid projects will not be languishing in eu bank accountswe agree with the house of lords select committee on the barnett formula which in 2009 concluded that: the barnett formula results in per capita allocations that are arbitrary and unfair scotland has markedly lower overall need than wales the barnett formula should no longer be used to determine annual increases in the block grant for the devolved administration a new system which allocates resources to the devolved administrations based on an explicit assessment of their relative needs should be introduced a formula based on relative need is a practical possibility.these conclusions echoed a house of commons justice committee report in the same year, which stated: the barnett formula is overdue for reform and lacks any basis in equity or logic. the government of the day was urged to devise a new, needs-based formula.both reports have been ignored.ukip will implement these recommendations within the time frame anticipated by the house of lordsinterest payments on our national debt alone cost 46 billion every year: more than 700 for every man, woman and child in the country. it is more than we are spending on defence.the chancellor has failed to stick to his 2010 promise to wipe out the deficit by the end of the current parliament, despite damaging cuts to public services. in the march 2015 budget, a new deficit reduction schedule was unveiled, envisaging the elimination of the deficit by the third year of the next parliament, with a surplus being recorded after that.while this current treasury plan is a reasonable target, there is little public faith it will be achieved, coming as is does in the wake of previous failure. ukip mps in the next parliament will make sure the treasury sticks to this latest plan, with no backsliding.we will hold the next chancellors feet to the fire when it comes to improving public finances. ukip will make a difference by being a powerful, much-needed voice in favour of sound financial management.financing ukip spending plansukip will finance a fairer tax system and fund our public spending proposals by sharp reductions in spending on specified public sector programmes. by the end of the next parliament we will:ukip 2015 manifesto >page8ukip believes the barnett formula has passed its sell-by date. spending has become increasingly unfair, with scotland receiving a considerably higher per capita spend, despite moving towards further tax-raising and spending powers of its own.select committee: a transitional period of between three and five years, preferably no more than seven.the introduction of a new system will result in substantial reductions in funding for scotland, but, as the scottish government is to have significant save 4 billion a year in capital expenditure by scrapping the hs2 vanity project, which will benefit the few at the expense of many reduce spending by 5.5 billion by replacing the barnett formulareplacing the barnett formulathe barnett formula is the method by which hm treasury allocates funds to scotland, wales and northern ireland. despite being in existence for thirty-seven years, since when we have seen devolution and significant changes in the respective countries fortunes, this formula has never been reviewed or updated. now discredited, it was disowned by lord barnett himself.scotland receives almost 1,400 more per person in public spending than the uk average and nearly 450 more than wales. this is why scotland is able to spend in a manner not possible elsewhere in the uk.further powers over taxation, borrowing and spending in due course, it can make its own decision as to whether to raise taxes or cut public spending to balance the books. either way, the devolved administration in scotland will be well placed to balance its fiscal, economic and spending priorities.cutting the cost of westminsterthe cost to the taxpayer of the houses of parliament, ministerial departments, the home civil service and whitehall-funded quangos is huge, running into hundreds of millions of pounds every year.ukip believes we can make considerable savings at the same time as improving democratic accountability. these savings include: reducing the size of the house of commons and ensuring parliamentary constituencies across the country are of equal size abolishing government departments when their essential powers and functions can be merged into other departments. such departments will include the department for energy and climate change, the department for international development, and the department for culture, media and sport reducing the number of secretaries of state, ministers and parliamentary under- secretaries-of-state and, accordingly, the size of government cutting departmental running costs where they do not deliver value for money reducing the 7.2 million cost of paid advisers and bring more transparency to theirappointment abolishing unnecessary quangos such as the cabinet offices big society programme (49 million), the national citizen service (62 million), dfids international citizen service volunteers (110 million) and defras waste resource action programme (15.5 million) clamping down on so-called fake charities, or state-funded political activism ending tax-payer funded overseas junketing and non-essential fact-finding missions ceasing all subsidies for bars and dining rooms in the palace of westminster preventing mps claiming expenses that are not incurred wholly, exclusively and necessarily in the performance of their duties, like every other member of society.we anticipate investing savings made from cutting the cost of westminster into a dedicated fund to contribute to the repair and maintenance of the beautiful and historic palace of westminster. the fabric of this building has been neglected and the estimated cost of essential repairs is currently 3 billion.government has focused on the wrong spending priorities for far too long.it is time to stop wasting money on trying to be popular on the world stage, andstart tackling urgent, pressing needs here in the uk.by changing our spending priorities british taxpayers can get much bettervalue for money. ukip will take britain out of the red and backinto the black.believe in britainimmigrationbritain is a compassionate, caring nation. in the course of our islands history we have welcomed millions of people to these shores and we are proud of that record. ukip does not have a problem with migration. what we do have a problem with is the uncontrolled, politically-driven immigration that has been promoted and sustained by labour and the conservatives.space not raceimmigration is not about race: it is about space. immigrants are not the problem, it is the current immigration system that is broken.ukip 2015 manifesto > page 10believe in britainsteven woolfe mepimmigration spokesmanthe increasing ebb and flow of people across our planet is one of the greatest issues of our time.in 1950s britain, some 25,000 immigrants arrived here annually and net migration was negligible.now, immigration into the uk is at an all time high: in the year to september 2014, 624,000migrants moved to our island and annual net migration, which takes into account those leaving thecountry, now stands at 298,000, again, a new recordnearly seven million immigrants came to the uk when the blair and brown labour governments deliberately and recklessly threw open our borders between 1997 and 2010. over two million more have arrived since david cameron came to power and spectacularly broke his promise to reduce net migration to the tens of thousands...no ifs. no buts. this unprecedented influx has had significant consequences on our economy, our public services, our culture and our environment.evidence from the eu and the uk parliaments treasury select committee reveals how immigration has driven down wages and led to job losses for british workers. the sheer weight of numbers, combined with rising birth rates (particularly to immigrant mothers) and an ageing population, is pushing public services to breaking point.to meet demand, we must build one home every seven minutes; we wait longer to see our gp or be treated in hospitals; our children are learning in schools with over-sized classes, or having lessons disrupted by building work as schools are forced to keep expanding.the british public has every right to be concerned.surveys consistently show immigration as one of the top three issues for voters. yet, instead of listening, the old parties have responded with insults and contempt: even our prime ministers have labelled good, decent people closet racists and bigots.immigration is not about race; it is about space. immigrants are not the problem; it is the current immigration system that is broken.our current immigration rules ignore the wishes of the british people. they discriminate in favour of eu citizens and against the rest of the world. the system is failing so badly that we cannot even properly identify how many people enter and leave our country.to reform our immigration system ukip will: take back control of our borders put a five-year moratorium on immigration for unskilled workers,which will enable the unemployed already living here to find work and those already working to see wage growth introduce an australian-style points based system to manage thenumber and skills of people coming into the country, treating all citizens of the world on a fair and equal basis as a welcoming, outward-looking country tackle the problem of sham marriages.these policies are essential if we are to give our country the breathing space it desperately needs from mass uncontrolled immigration, create harmonious, integrated communities, and catch up on building the essential infrastructure needed to sustain our growing nation.believe in britaincontrolling our borderswe can never control immigration while we continue to be members of the european union.until we leave, we are forced to abide by the eus founding, unshakable principle of the free movement of people, meaning we cannot prevent the flow of citizens from all eu member states into britain.other political parties will promise to control immigration, but while they continue to support the uks membershipof the eu, they are not being honest with the electorate. wholly unable to control eu migration, they can only reduce numbers by slamming the door in the face of people from around the rest of the world.those from the eu, and apply a moratorium to unskilled and low-skilled labour over the course of the next parliament.ukip has no intention of pulling up the drawbridge to britain, as has been suggested. we simply want to control who walks over it, like nearly 200 other countries worldwide.our visa systema new visa system will be operated on a strict principle of non-discrimination between peoples of all nations applying to work, study and visit the united kingdom. we will offer five principal visa categories:for visitor visas and term-dated entry passes. student visas the international student community makes an important contribution to the uk. because studentsare in britain only on a temporary basis, we will categorise them separately in immigration figures.all non-uk undergraduate and post-graduate students will be required to maintain private health insurance for the period of their study.we will also: review which educational institutions are eligible to enrollinternational students and prevent abuse of the student visa system. students not attending courses will have their visas withdrawn and colleges not reporting absentees will be barred from accepting international students. family reunion visas it is important that british citizens and those with permanent leave to remain here can form legal family relationships with non-british citizens and we will review the family union system to ensure this basic principle is respected and applies equally to all. however, our key aim is to control immigration, so we will abolish the eea family permit scheme and reinstate the primary purpose rule, meaning foreign nationals marrying british citizens will have to prove that the primary purpose of their marriage is not to obtain british residency. asylum visas we will comply fully with the 1951 un convention relating to the status of refugees; speed up the asylum process; and seek to do so while tackling logjams in the system for those declined asylum status. we will continue to honour our obligations to bona fide asylum seekers.the old parties already support blatant discrimination against commonwealth countries, with whom britain has traditionally had long and friendly relationships. this inequality will at best continue and at worst increase, under their prejudicial immigration policies. work visas will be issued to skilled and key workers under our australian-style pointsbased system.workers under this scheme will be required to have medical insurance to cover both themselves and anyukip will: increase the numbers of border agency staff by 2,500 implement new border control technology solutionsto ensure all passport and visa holders are counted in and out and to identify over-stayers, including those on student visas.managing immigrationwe will establish a migration control commission to oversee operation of our australian-style points based system.this commission will operate under a strict mandate to significantly reduce the numbers of people migrating to the uk. it will determine britains economic and social needs annually and then recommend how many immigrants, with what skills required, we will accept into britain. becausethe other parties have failed to control immigration, ukip will limit highly-skilled work visas to 50,000 per annum, includingukip 2015 manifesto > page 12dependents for five years duration. during this timethey will not be able to claim any benefits or non-urgent nhs treatment, unless they can be treated under any reciprocal international agreements or have been granted a specific exception by the migration control commission.those arriving on work visas will not be granted permanent leave to remain, however they can apply for british citizenship after five years if they have worked and paid tax here. visitor visas and entry passes we value and want to encourage tourism, however there are inequalities inthe current system, which treats some nationalitiesmore favourably than others. the migration control commission will be charged with finding a system which enables countries with which the uk already has close ties, such as member states of the european union and the commonwealth, to establish reciprocal arrangementsaccess to welfare and the nhswe have an over-stretched nhs and a high benefits bill, partly because of the pressure from immigration. to combat this, all new migrants to britain will have to make tax and national insurance contributions for five consecutive years before they will become eligible to claim uk benefits, or access to more than non-urgent nhs services, save for any exceptions stipulated by the migration control commission.british citizenshipsave for current applications, approved asylum cases and family reunions, we will cease grant of permanent leave to remain status. those on work visas may apply for british citizenship once they have been here for five years.we will revoke the british citizenship of those who have obtained it by fraud or deception and remove those who have obtained entry into britain by this means.we take the view that british citizens who choose to fight alongside terrorist organisations effectively abdicate their rights to citizenship. we will amend the foreign enlistment act 1870 to make enlistment in violent armed groups or transnational terror organisations a crime and we will seek a means to revoke their citizenship and prevent their repatriation.illegal immigrationthere will be no amnesty for illegal immigrants.we will increase the number of immigration compliance and enforcement teams and review current holding and accommodation arrangements for illegal immigrants.foreign criminalsforeign criminals will not be granted a visa to enter the ukresident migrants who commit crimes resulting in custodial sentence will have their visa revoked and they will be subject to a deportation order. they will be detained until they are removed from the uk.ending the eu freedom of movement of peopleour new immigration policies will begin when we confirm our intention to leave the eu with an out vote in a national referendum.any european union citizen who is resident in the uk at the time of the referendum will be permitted to remain and work here. they will be able to enjoy the benefits of the uk as before and have the opportunity to apply for uk citizenship after five years.the british people accept immigrants and are among the most welcoming and tolerant people in the world. ukips policies recognise the new openness in our world and the positive benefits controlled immigration has brought and can continue to bring to our nation.only ukips policies have, at their heart, sustainability, ethics and fairness. it is only by pursuing these policies and introducing anaustralian-style points based system, that we can all be confident immigration will benefit britain.believe in britainukip 2015 manifesto > page 14the nhsukip has a clear vision for 21st century healthcare: an efficient, affordable, world-class, national health service, free at the point of delivery and in time of need. the people of britain are rightly proud of the nhs and we will invest 12 billion over the next five years to keep it working for them.louise bours mephealth spokesmanbritains best-loved institution is in crisis. the founding of the nhs in1948 was a victory for the people but, sixty years on, it is the nhs itselfthat needs emergency care and nursing back to health.our ageing population; the dramatic increase in the numbers of people suffering chronic, long-term conditions; uncontrolled immigration, encouraged by labour and continued under the tories: any one of these pressures might have been enough to bring the nhs close to breaking point. combine these with eu directives that have prevented essential training and endless political interference and it is not difficult to understand why the nhs is in serious trouble.both labour and the tories have utterly failed our nhs by treating it as a political football instead of a cherished institution.patients are suffering because of poor policy, made all too often purely for reasons of political expediency. a gp appointment can no longer be guaranteed within any reasonable time frame. coalition cuts to social care budgets are forcing elderly people to stay in hospital for longer than they should because there is no after-care available for them. top-down targets forced on accident and emergency departments are not realistic; even some of the best hospitals cannot cope.despite a chronic shortage of doctors, nurses and midwives, david camerons government wasted billions on a top-down reorganisation he promised would not happen. labour, which squandered money on financing capital projects at credit card rates throughprivate finance initiatives and giving service contracts worth billions of pounds to private companies when they were in power, are now promising to repeal the health and social care act, meaning yet more billions will be wasted re-organising the nhs all over again. both parties administered a disastrous 12 billion nhs it project which ultimately failed.ukip will take better care of taxpayers money. we will put an additional 3 billion a year into the nhs in england by the end of the parliament and make sure the money is spent on frontline patient care. we will provide the common sense, the money, the staff, the social care funding and the vital improvements to emergency medicine that the nhs needs.we will fund: -8,000 more gpswe will train and employ gps to meet this current shortfall and waive university tuition fees for new medical students who work in britain for five years after qualifying.to encourage those who have left the profession to get back into the surgery, we will fund the cost of re-training for gps who wish to return to practice.to cut gp waiting times and allow gps to spend more time actually seeing patients, ukip will reduce the burden of data collection, target chasing, revalidation and appraisal work that interferes with the care gps can give to patients.20,000 more nurses and 3,000 more midwivesnot only will ukip find the training of nurses and midwives, we will also fund return to practice training for those who have taken career breaks. because we believe nursing starts and ends on the ward, we will bring back the state enrolled nurse, and put care and compassion back at the heart of nursing.believe in britainemergency medicinethere is a shortage of emergency medicine consultants in our accident and emergency departments, just 1200 when the profession needs closer to 2000. the problem stems not so much from a deficiency in training capacity, but from poor retention once registrars or consultants have qualified. 500 uk-trained emergency medicine consultants are currently working in australia, new zealand and canada alone, which illustrates the attrition rate.bodies representing this field of medicine believe the solution lies in improving working conditions, such as the extent of weekend cover, unsocial hours, extended shifts and leave patterns. funding the additional consultants is not in itself a problem, as the cost of locums to cover the current shortage far exceeds that of increasing employed staff and this is what we will do.gps for a&espatients who cannot get a gp appointment frequently turn up in a&e instead, putting additional pressure on already over-stretched resources. we will initiate pilot programmes in english hospitals to put gps on duty in a&e departments seven days a week. if these pilots succeed in easing the burden on a&e staff by freeing them up to treat seriously ill patients more successfully, we will roll the programme out across the country, deploying approximately 1,000 of the 8,000 additional gps we are committed to funding.improved mental health servicespatients with mental health problems frequently feel ignored and let down. ukip takes a whole person approach to health and that means giving mental health parity with physical health. we will introduce practical policies to improve delivery of mental health services, including: - directing patients diagnosed with a debilitating long-term condition or terminal illnesses to mental health professionals when appropriate recognising there is often a link between addiction and mental illness and offering appropriate treatment where this is the case offering direct access to specialist mental health treatment for pregnant women and mothers of children under 12 months of age fighting the stigma around mental illness and supporting those seeking to get back into work.ukip 2015 manifesto > page 16patients experiencing distress or exhibiting mental ill-health issues when admitted to hospital should have both their physical health and mental wellbeing assessed. this must not just be an optional extra: we will end the postcode lottery for psychiatric liaison services in acute hospitals and a&e departments.to fund these initiatives, we will increase mental health funding by 170 million annually, phasing this in through the first two years of the next parliament.dementia treatment and researchthis debilitating and distressing condition is the leading cause of death among women over the age of 55 and the fifth biggest killer of men.we will be investing a full extra 130 million a year into researching and treating dementia by 2017.ukip will put the national back into our national health servicewe need to get tough on so-called health-tourism. every year the nhs spends up to2 billion of uk taxpayers money treating those ineligible for free care. this bill includes foreign nationals who come to britain to deliberately seek nhs services at no cost to themselves; those who live here but who do not qualify for free care; treatment for illegal immigrants and those who overstay their visas.the nhs is the national health service, not the international health service.ukip will insist migrants and visitors who come to britain have approved medical insurance. only those who have the permanent right to remain in britain and who have paid uk taxes for at least five years will be granted an nhs number and be eligible for the full services offered by the nhs. urgent medical treatment will still be given to those who need it, but non-urgent treatment will be charged for.ukip is the only party that is truly willing to face up to the harsh reality of how health tourism and treating those ineligible is sapping the nhs of funds. the other parties have their heads stuck well and truly in the sand.hospital parking chargeshospital car parking charges are a tax on the sick. we will invest 200 million to make parking at english hospitals free for patients and their visitors.effective and powerful healthcare monitoringwe think nhs managers should be subject to disciplinary oversight in the same way as doctors and nurses who are regulated by the general medical council and the nursing and midwifery council. we will introduce a licence to manage as a statutory requirement to prevent incompetent, negligent or bullying managers being moved sideways or re-employed by the nhs as external consultants.we will also abolish monitor and the care quality commission and place their inspectorate functions into the hands of county health boards made up of health and social care professionals elected locally by their peers. county health boards will have the power to inspect health services, conduct snap inspections and take evidence from whistleblowers. they will be charged witha statutory duty to investigate concerns flagged up by their local healthwatch or local authority health scrutiny panels, so local democratic control and accountability is brought to healthcare decisions directly affecting our local communities.ending labours pfi scandalwhen short-sighted politicians are desperate for votes, they make appalling decisions. labours private finance initiative (pfi) scandal is a case in point. by the time the 14 billion capital cost of nhs pfi contracts have run their course, the nhs will have been forced to pay out a total of 76 billion. ukip will not continue to privatise the nhs by the back door, as both labour and the conservatives have done. we will end the use of pfi contracts within the nhs.stripping out unnecessary eu regulationnumerous eu directives prevent medical institutions from operating in the best interests of patients. we will scrap at least two of them: the eu clinical trial directive, which has led to a substantial drop in clinical research and threatened britains position as a world-class leader in this field; and the eu working time directive which, by limiting working and training time to 48 hours in any one week, prevents medics learning essential new skills, putting patient care at risk.the transatlantic trade and investment partnership (ttip)ttip is a proposed eu/usa free trade agreement that is being negotiated in secret by the eu trade commission and other eu bureaucrats.there is growing concern that ttip may compel us to put many of our public services up for sale to us companies, thereby privatising significant parts of our nhs.ukip is committed to securing the exclusion of the nhs, by name, from ttip.the level of public concern around ttip makes it a good example of what can potentially go wrong while we remain in the eu and allow eu commissioners to negotiate every single trade agreement on behalf of twenty-eight member states, including the uk, en bloc.fears of what ttip might contain precisely illustrate why ukip believes we should leave the eu and negotiate our own free trade agreements again.we find it astonishing that other political parties, while launching high-profilecampaigns against ttip, nevertheless remain committed to our eu membership.their hypocrisy is shameless.believe in britainsocial carethe coalition cuts went deep. ukip will increase social care funding by 1.2 billion each year, phasing in this increase over a two-year period, to bring investment back to 2010 levels and pay for the additional residential, nursing and home care services that are so desperately needed.funding crisisthe good news is we are living longer. the bad news is this is causing a crisis in elderly care.ukip 2015 manifesto > page 18believe in britainaccording to age uk, 900,000 older people between the ages of 65 and 89 have social care needs that are not met. residential care, nursing care, home care, day care and equipment budgets have been cut. meals on wheels services have been scrapped in some areas, or frozen ready-meals have replaced freshly cooked hot food.these cuts impact on the nhs: one million hospital bed days are lost every year when patients cannot be discharged because there is no after-care available for them. operations are cancelled for the same reason.how we look after our older people and others who are vulnerable in society because of ill health is a mark of how civilised we are as a society. it is scandalous that the current care system is failing those who most need our help. we believe putting back the investment that was taken away by the current government is more than expedient:it is our duty.the 1.2 billion ukip will invest every year by the end of the next parliament will fund social care directly and ease the path through a change we want to make to the way the current system is financed.integrating health and social carewhile local authorities manage social care, the nhs manages health. this makes for a complex, inefficient and fragmented approach. while attempts to integrate the two, while keeping funding and responsibilities separate, have been commendable, the common sense, long-term solution is simply to fully integrate health and social care.ukip will bring health and social care together, under the control of the nhs.funding older peoples carein 2010, the commission on funding of care and support, chaired by andrew dilnot, was tasked by government with reviewing the funding system for care and support in england. it concluded that an individuals contribution to social care costs should be capped at 35,000.we agree in principle: easing the burden on the growing numbers of families who face ever-increasing elderly care costs is clearly desirable, if currently unaffordable.we propose a possible future solution: the establishment ofa sovereign wealth fund from any tax revenue received from shale oil and gas exploration, with investment returns ring- fenced to fully implement the commissions recommendations.the viability of this proposal clearly depends on several unknowns, not least getting the go-ahead for shale exploration and unpredictable market forces, but we feel it is important to state this policy as an intention. should fracking in the uk prove to be possible and profitable, we want to see the nations income from it spent on looking after older people. abolish the annual assessment process for continuing healthcare funding in respect of those suffering from degenerative, terminal illnesses keep free bus passes, winter fuel allowances, free tv licenses for the over 75s and free prescriptions and eye tests for the over-60s, without means testing.we will also fund a co-ordinating service for older peoplein every county, combining resources from across the nhs, social services, community agents and the voluntary sector. no vulnerable person should feel isolated or alone and this service will be proactive in identifying and assisting those suffering from loneliness.a better deal for home care workersgood home care starts with good home care workers, who provide a lifeline to some of the most vulnerable peoplein our society. theirs is a difficult enough job to do at the best of times and long hours and low pay make an already challenging role even more onerous.we cannot expect workers to give the best care if they themselves are not being cared for.establishing a sovereign wealth fund from the tax profits of fracking, and ring-fencing the income it generates for a social care fund, will potentially release older people from the distress of having to sell their homes to pay for care and give them and their families peace of mind.this is a serious issue ukip will tackle head-on. we will not allow the nhs or third parties under contract to employ home care workers on zero hour contracts ofany kind.improving standards in careukip believes the elderly and vulnerable must be treated with compassion and dignity. we will: introduce a legally-binding dignity code to improve standards of professional care pledge to protect services such as day care, home care and meals on wheels abolish the practice of arranging home care visits in fifteen-minute windowsneither will we allow them to end up being paid less than the minimum wage because they areexpected to travel between appointments in their own time. we will insist they are paid for the entire time they are on duty.we believe that as britains largest employer, the nhs should set an example.believe in britainpensions changesraising the retirement age to 66 by 2020 and to 67 by 2028 is hugely unpopular.ukip 2015 manifesto > page 20pensions have changed considerably since 2010. the state pension has been simplified toa single-tier. the need to apply for pension credit (which often went unclaimed) has beenremoved. the triple lock now guarantees the state pension will increase each year bythe higher of inflation, earnings or 2.5 per cent. there is greater flexibility in howpersonal pensions can be accessed. these are all welcome reforms.pensionraising the retirement age to 66 by 2020 and to 67 by 2028 is hugely unpopular. it has beenespecially tough for women, who until 2010 could retire at 60. also, millions of people who can nowwithdraw unlimited amounts from their personal pension pot may not be well-informed enough tomake the best onward investments, or avoid falling victim to scams.flexible state pension agewhen you have looked forward to retirement, short- notice changes to the state pension age can wreck long-term plans. ukip will give pensioners some choice over the age at which they choose to retire.we will introduce a flexible state pension window, which will widen over time, so even when the state pension age increases to 69, pensioners will still be able to take a slightly lower weekly state pension from the age of 65.pensioners will know how much less they will be paid at the time they make their decision. at the moment, you can delay taking your state pension in return fora slightly higher amount, so ukips proposal merely extends the option in the other direction. this proposal will be cost-neutral to the state over time. a flexible state pension window already works well in other countries, notably italy, norway, sweden and finland, so there is no reason why it will not work in the uk.personal pension advicewith greater freedom over personal pensions comes individual responsibility for retirement finance planning. historically, people have had limited options of when to draw down funds from their personal plans. most were forced to take out an annuity,paid out evenly, over the course of their retirement. pensioners will now be making complex decisions about when and how much to take from their pension pots and, before doing so, they need expert advice to make sound, well-informed choices.all pensioners get from the current government is 45 minutes of advice provided by the pensions advisory service or citizens advice bureau. this is completely inadequate when potentially life- changing decisions are at stake.ukip will fund a higher standard of independent advice available to all pensioners. we will double the budget for guidance in 2015/16 from 30 million to 60 million, and treble the 2016/17 budget from10 million to 30 million. in consultation with bodies such as the chartered insurance institute and the personal finance society, we will develop a pensions advice and seminar programme that will help protect pensioners best interests and savings.anti-scamming rulesa further concern is that pensioners with limited financial experience may become the victims of mis-selling when they cash in their pension pots and have access to potentially large sums of money.to prevent mis-selling, ukip will make it a criminal offence to cold call someone in respect of their pension arrangements. this will not affect regulated advisors or pension schemes where there is already an existing relationship with a client.rogue, unregulated operators must not be allowed to take advantage of pensioners while lining their own pockets.war widows pensionson 8th november 2014, the government announced that war widows and widowers would receive a war widows pension for life, even after remarriage, with effect from april 2015. however, this change was not retrospective and is therefore manifestly unfair. we will give all war widows and widowers a war pension, regardless of when they may have remarried.believe in britainwelfare and disabilitycircumstances can conspire against any one of us to leave us unemployed, seriously ill and unable to work, perhaps even facing bankruptcy and homelessness. ukip is fully committed to maintaining a strong and supportive safety net for those who fall on hard times, whether through any fault of their own or not.cllr star etheridgedisability spokesmanukip 2015 manifesto > page 22we want to see a welfare system that is fairer, simpler and less open to abuse. our approach isone that firmly opposes the benefits lifestyle but also addresses the current welfare regime,which has produced unjust outcomes.our common sense approach to benefits includes: - supporting a lower cap on benefits cracking down on benefit fraud ending welfare tourism with a five-year ban on benefitsfor migrants stopping child benefit being paid to children who dont live in the uk limiting child benefit to two children for new claimants. housing benefitsthe bedroom tax is clearly unfair and is not working. changes to the way housing benefit is paid are leading some tenants to fall into debt. the conservative threat to withdraw housing benefit from the under-25s may cause even more suffering. ukip will: scrap the bedroom tax continue to pay housing benefit to young people underthe age of 25 give tenants the right to request housing benefit is paid direct to their landlords, whatever benefit scheme they are on.disability benefitsukip is fully committed to protecting the rights of disabled people, as set out in article 19 of the united nations convention on the rights of persons with disabilities.we wholly endorse the right of the disabled to access in- home, residential and community support services andwe support their inclusion in our communities. we also recognise that there will always be disabled people who areinvesting in foodbanksunable to work and we are committed to supporting them it is deeply regrettable that there is increasing demandthrough a fair and fit-for-purpose welfare system.we will end unfair atos-style work capability assessments and return assessments to gps or appropriate specialist consultants, who have full access to patients medical records and are likely to know the patient. we believe this makes them the best person to undertake assessments and we will ensure they are adequately funded and resourced to take on this task.for foodbanks in 21st century britain. if those who attend foodbanks are in such dire straits that they need food handouts, there is a high likelihood that they will also need additional support to deal with issues such as debt, familywe will also: require gps/specialists to notify the department for work and pensions when they believe a patient is well enough to return to work, by issuing a fit note remove tick-box and quota arrangements from sickness and disability assessments, thereby streamlining and speeding up the assessment processes and continually respecting claimants throughout the processsupporting carersmillions give up work, or work reduced hours, to care for elderly or disabled relatives. in doing so, they make a huge contribution to society, although often at great personal and financial cost.we will: increase carers allowance from 62.10 per weekto match the higher level of job seekers allowance, currently 73.10 per week, an extra 572 per year improve carers access to support by sharing information on benefit and social care entitlements and support groups across all public services.breakdown, addiction and poor physical or mental health. many will need employment or legal advice.we will therefore contribute to the important work done by foodbanks and develop them into community advice centres for those most in need.ukip will train and fund the cost of 800 advisers to work in 800 foodbanks, so the poorest in our society have free and easy access to timely help in their hour of need.we will also exempt foodbanks and charity shops from charges imposed by local authorities to dispose of unwanted food waste and other goods. they are not businesses in the sense most of us understand the term and therefore should not be expected to pay fees for waste disposal.believe in britainchildcare and the familyukip believes supporting children and families is a pre-requisite for a strong and healthy society. families areimportant, in all their diversity, and we want to help createa society in which they thrive and where childcare provisionis affordable and accessible for all parents, whatever theirsocio-economic status.childcare costssuzanne evansdeputy chairman, policyukip 2015 manifesto > page 24the childcare system is not working. it needs reform as a matter of urgency.good childcare benefits parents, helps child development and supports oureconomy. ukips vision for childcare is a system where parents, teachers,schools, nurseries, childrens centres, local authorities, childcare providers andbusinesses all work together to make provision as affordable, flexible, availableand as high-quality as possible.the policies of current and previous governments have been counter- productive in many ways: over-regulation has helped create an acute shortage of places and voucher systems have contributed to pushingup the cost of childcare.uk childcare costs are now the most expensive in europe, and among the highest in the world. costs can be cripplingfor ordinary families. what is the point of having a childcare system that is so expensive it does not payto work?children from socially deprived backgrounds are adversely affected because their applications for places are most likely to be turned down, especially if parents are unable to pay for top-ups such asmeals, nappies and so on.childcare provision is also complex and fragmented. several government departments oversee different schemes providing help with childcare costs. parents may struggle to work out whichtype of childcare funding system will work best for them. those on modest incomes who work hard may find they fall through the gaps. parents who are self-employed, agency workers,those on zero-hours contracts or commission are most likely to be affected, as any rise in income may prove punitive, depending on which childcare support scheme has been chosen.a simpler system, more responsive to families changing needs and with integrated sources of funding, must be initiated at the earliest opportunity, alongside proposals to reduce the cost ofchildcare and increase the number of childcare places, while giving parents more choice.we will initiate a full review of childcare provision.early years childcareukip will continue to fund the current childcare offer of fifteen hours a week of free childcare at a nursery, pre- school, or for a childminder, for all three to four year olds, and for all two-year olds whose parent are on certain benefits. we will also honour the current governments commitment to providing a new tax-free childcare scheme, worth up to 2,000 for children under twelve.however, we will amend the voucher scheme in order to address the shortage of places and cut the cost to both parents and the state, by de-regulating childcare provision.at the moment, if parents want to claim their free childcare entitlement, they must place their child with an ofsted-registered childminder. ukip will remove this requirement and allow parents to use any third-party, non-related child carer they feel comfortable placing their child with, provided the care provided can be provento be genuine. this is intended to encourage experienced parents whose own children have grown up, for instance, or who would like to combine looking after other peoples children alongside their own, to offer childcare. our plans will also make it cost-effective for parents to hire a nanny if they have more than one young child, or enable parents to club together to hire a nanny.believe in britainukip 2015 manifesto > page 26while parents should of course make their own enquiries as to the suitability of informal providers, in the same way they would check out a babysitter, we will require informal child carers to satisfy the following criteria to benefit from the voucher scheme: - they must pass a disclosure and barring service (dbs) check they must hold relevant household and public liability insurance they must not look after more than six children up to the age of eight (including any of their own children), of which a maximum of three can be under fives a single childminder may only care for one child under one year oldthe building from which they operate (unless it is the childs own home) must benotified to the local authority and be subject to spot checks.this combination of de-regulation, practical solutions and incentives will reduce childcare costs, increase childcare availability and make it easier for parents to findflexible childcare that works around their working hours and lifestyle.creating more nursery placesukip will make consideration of the necessity to include nursery or creche provision an essential part of the planning process for large developments.we will also amend planning legislation to ensure planning applications for family housing developments of forty homes or more,without dedicated garden space for each unit, will be required to include a communal play area in each scheme.planning applications for family housing developments of forty homes or more, without dedicated garden space for each unit, will also be required to include acommunal play area in each scheme.we will also allow office space to be converted to nursery facilities under permitted development rights. we will also ask employers to pool nursery provisions for all families within the local community, where ever possible.tackling excessive regulation without compromising child safety is a priority. nurseries are often small businesses and we would prefer owners to be focused on childcare, rather than drowning in paperwork.childcare for school-age childrenfor parents of school-age children, extending the school day by offering wrap-around childcare will offer enormous benefits to working parents, for whom it is likely to be by far the most sensible and convenient childcare option.we will place a statutory duty on all primary schools to offer before and after-school care from 8am to 6pm during term time, with the option to extend this to all-day provision throughout the school holidays.sessions will include breakfast and healthy snacks. sadly, anecdotal evidence suggests significant numbers of teachers are seeing pupils arrive at school hungry.schools can choose how they facilitate before and after- school care. they can provide it themselves; partner with external childcare providers; or allow parents to club together. there will be no cost to the school, as parents will pay for the cost of childcare themselves or use the voucher scheme.emergency childcarelocal authorities will be required to keep a register ofchild care providers willing to offer emergency childcare cover at short notice, during atypical hours, overnight, or at weekends.this will help families who need to access high quality care during unsocial hours, in an emergency, when they are called to a job interview at short notice, or when they are working away from home, for example.the care systemukip will reform the care system so the 68,000 children in care in the uk (including 3,600 under the age of one) can find stability through fostering and adoption in a faster, more efficient way. we will extend the provisions of the childrenand families act 2014, which gives children in care the choice to stay with their foster families until they turn 21, to children in homes, so they too have the same opportunity.fathers and familiesukip wants fathers to be more involved in their childrens lives.to help prevent thousands of fathers losing contact with their children each year when couples break up, ukip will legislate for an initial presumption of 50-50 shared parenting in child residency matters.grandparents will also be given visiting rights, unless it can be shown to the satisfaction of the family court that there is a good reason to withhold such rights.we will also review the family court system, with the intention ofimplementing independent lay oversight of family courts, to ensure that necessary confidentiality does not prevent proper scrutiny in this and all areasof family law.a far-reaching child care reviewa misplaced sensitivity to issues of race and religion, combined with fear, has been shown to have stopped many investigations into the abuse of children. there is also concern among the public at rising levels of forced adoptions. some of those charged with protecting children in care are letting serious cases of abuse and maltreatment slip through the net. our childrens wellbeing lags behind many of our european neighbours and we are seeing alarming rates of self-harm and poor mental health.ukip is committed to bringing forward a full, open review of all childcare and child protection services in britain, with a view to initiating wholesale reform of a system that is clearly failing.our children deserve better and ukip will investigate failings without fear or favour to deliver a safer, brighter, fairer future for our children.believe in britaineducationukips vision for british education is of a world-renowned system; a system designed to allow youngpeople to perform to the best of their ability, regardless ofbackground, gender, race, wealth or class.ukip 2015 manifesto > page 28paul nuttall mepdeputy leader andeducation spokesmanit is morally wrong that five independent fee-paying schools should send more studentsto oxbridge than the worst performing two thousand secondary schools combined andthat more students from the state sector attended oxbridge in the 1960s than do so now.we believe it is the duty of the state to ensure high quality education is provided for all. to achieve this, we will build our education policy upon three key principles: -1. education must be responsive to individual needschildren have widely different aptitudes and capabilities and, crucially, they develop at different rates. our school system and our whole approach to education should be more flexible than it is now.2. good teachers are paramountthe quality of education is almost entirely dependent on the quality of teaching. we need the best people to choose to teach and we need to keep them teaching. to achieve this, we must ensure not only that teachers are well-prepared for a teaching career, but also that they have a high status in society and feel valued.3. the importance of primary educationa childs first experience of education is vitally important, as this is when the pattern for learning is laid down and when literacy and good social skills are established.cutting teachers workloadtoo many teachers are working excessive hours and struggling to find an acceptable work-life balance. we do not want stressed, overworked teachers in our classrooms. their workloads must be eased.we will decrease the amount of paperwork teachers deal with, such as overly detailed individual lesson plans, data collection, excessive internal assessments and dialogue- based marking schemes. the plethora of centralised targets will be streamlined and lesson observations limited to a maximum of one each term, except when there are concerns about teaching performance that appraisal processes have been unable to address. enforcing the current restrictionon class sizes to thirty pupils and aiming to reduce this to twenty-five pupils over time, will further ease teacher workloads  not least when it comes to marking - as well as ease parental concerns about large class sizes.we will scrap teachers performance-related pay, which the nut describes as having increased bureaucracy and working hours and does not adequately reflect teaching ability.primary educationukip will abolish key stage 1 sats, set at the age of seven, as these tests have destructive, unintended consequences: they encourage teaching to the test, they narrow the curriculum and, often, they put pressure on teachersto concentrate disproportionate resources and time onborderline pupils. worst of all, these tests create anxiety for everyone  children, teachers, parents, school governors at exactly the time when children should be learning to learn, to enjoy the experience and to think of school as a fun and rewarding place to be.to increase the uptake of science learning at secondary level, we will follow the recommendations of the campaign for science and engineering and require every primary school to nominate (and train, if necessary) a science leader to inspire and equip the next generation. this role willalso help to address the gender imbalance in thescientific subjects.sex educationwe support age-appropriate sex and relationship education at secondary level, but not for primary school children.there is a world of difference between teaching young children about online safety or telling them no one else is allowed to touch the private parts of their body, which is a sensible way to help prevent and encourage reporting of abuse and going into too much detail. the latter risks sexualising childhood, causing confusion and anxiety, and encouraging experimentation.we will also rule that all parents must be made fully aware of the sex education teaching materials being used, before their children see it, and we will continue to respect their right to withdraw children from sex-education classes if they wish.believe in britainukip 2015 manifesto > page 30secondary educationukip will push for a range of different types of school, including grammar, vocational, technical and specialist secondary schools within a geographical area. this will make our secondary school system more responsive to the differing aptitudes, capabilities and speed of development of our children.grammar schoolsin stark contrast to the other main parties, who have persistently campaigned against them, ukip supports grammar schools. demand for places far outstrips supply and ukip will give existing secondary schools the opportunity to become grammar schools.many pupils learn best in a rigorous academic environment and the system can improve social mobility for able children from poorer backgrounds. we want to foster academic education among bright poorer students still further, and ultimately, ukip wants to see a grammar school in every town.we recognise that the old 11+ selective system was not perfect, so we will ensure attendance is not based on a one- time fixed test and introduce transfer examinations taken later at ages 12, 13 and 16, to pick up pupils who develop in an academic direction, but at a slightly slower pace.vocational educationas well as allowing existing schools to become grammar schools, we will allow other establishments to become vocational schools or colleges similar to those promoted in germany and the netherlands, so pupils develop practical skills.further, by linking vocational schools and colleges with industry, we will introduce an option for students to take an apprenticeship qualification instead of four non-core gcses. students can then continue their apprenticeships past the age of 16, working with certified professionals qualified to grade their progress.with regard to secondary education, we will also: reintroduce the intermediate tier at gcse mathematics, to ensure foundation and intermediate tiers are skills-based and that the higher tier is a rigorous preparation for a level abolish the as level exam as a stepping stone to a full a level, while retaining it as a standalone qualification in its own right for those who choose to approach it as such.if young students want to take a full a level, they may as well start the essential in-depth learning immediately and escape the stressful treadmill of continuous examinations from 16 onwards. this move has the additional advantage of releasing an extra six weeks of lessons during the summer term between gcses and a levels make first aid training a statutory part of personal, social and health education (pshe) in the national curriculum. we will learn from the french system where pupils can obtain a basic life-saving diploma at the end of secondary school. this will include instruction in cardiopulmonary resuscitation for all secondary school pupils fund all secondary schools according to a single formula, taking into account special educational needs, to ensure underfunding such as that for secondary moderns in the 1950s can never be repeated.special educational needs (sen)the policy of closing special schools will be reversed. every child is unique and the needs of each child should come first. those who learn better in a tailored, non-mainstream environment should have the opportunity to do so.ofstedofsted inspections will be streamlined to focus on the quality of teaching, learning and the overall wellbeing of children, rather than paperwork, school policies or tick-box targets. inspections will be shorter, classroom-orientated, and more transparent. we will continue to monitor british values, but with a view towards combatting extremism and radicalisation, rather than criticising widely-held judeo- christian beliefs.teachers with at least fifteen years successful classroom experience will be prioritised when ofsted inspectorsare recruited: teachers are right to question whetherthey should be judged by those who have less classroom experience than themselves.schools will be subject to additional investigations by ofsted if 25 per cent of parents or governors present a petition to the department for education.an independent body will hear complaints about an ofsted inspection. we will remove ofsteds right to investigate itself.higher educationprevious government policies of pursuing higher education targets and introducing tuition fees have had a crippling effect on our young peoples finances and job prospects.the average student now leaves university with a debt of 44,000, yet students are less likely to find a graduate-level job than ever before. 47 per cent of recent graduates were under-employed in 2013, as opposed to just 37 per centin 2001. this marks a 27 per cent increase in the inabilityof graduates to get a job utilising or requiring their degree qualification.the taxpayer fares little better: 45 per cent of all student loans have to be written-off.to combat this growing problem, ukip will drop the arbitrary 50 per cent target for school leavers going to university. we will not increase the current level of undergraduate courses until we can be sure there are sufficient vacancies in the economy to provide at least two-thirds of students with skilled graduate jobs.we will also encourage students to choose careers that will help fill the current skills gap, to both benefit britain and set them on the path to a solid, prosperous career.uk students taking approved degrees in science, technology, engineering, mathematics and medicine (stemm), mainly at universities funded by the higher education funding council for england, will not have to repay their tuition fees. this is on condition that they work in their discipline and pay tax in the uk for at least five years, after they complete their degrees.accordingly, ukip will adjust the number of stemm subjects funded to allow for a greater uptake of these subjects.international studentswe are currently obliged to give tuition fee loans to eea students as a condition of our eu membership, but as of march 2013, only 11 per cent of eu domiciled students were making any repayments. as student loans include a huge subsidy from the taxpayer and because repayment rates are so low, we will not give tuition fee loans to eea students when we leave the eu. they will of course be welcometo apply for places at uk universities as self-supporting international students.parental choiceukip supports the right of parents to home-school their children, if they choose to do. we will support and fund free schools, provided they are open to the wholelocal community, uphold british values and do not discriminate against any section of society.believe in britainhousing and the environmentukip is the only party to recognise that a house needs tobe built every seven minutes to meet demand. the housingshortage is leading to higher rents, less stable tenancies,and rising homelessness. this is completely unsustainable.ukip 2015 manifesto > page 32andrew charalamboushousing and environment spokesmanthere is a dire shortage of affordable housing in britain. many of those who would liketo own their own home are simply unable to even contemplate it. they are locked out ofhome ownership.social housing waiting lists get longer and longer. the thatcher era saw a dramatic extension in home ownership, but with a corresponding decline in social housing,as proceeds from the right to buy initiative were not reinvested back into community housing.only 23 per cent of properties are deemed affordable nationally, but the situation is even worse in the countryside, where only 5 per cent of rural properties are affordable and social housing is more difficult to find. yet no-one wantsto see our green fields concreted over, or the beauty of our rural landscape destroyed. charge those whose homes are empty for more than two years 50 per cent more than the applicable rate of council tax, with exceptions for owners who are in hm armed forces.incentivising brownfield developmentit would be possible to build up to 2.5 million houses on brownfield sites, if developers were less reluctant to take advantage of this rich source of potential housing land. problems with remediation of derelict land that has had a grants of up to 10,000 per unit will be available to developers to carry out essential remediation work. properties built on registered brownfield sites will be exempt from stamp duty on first sale, up to the 250,000 threshold. a grant to cover the cost of indemnity insurance will also be available to developers of decontaminated land.to further incentivise brownfield development, local authorities will be allowed to keep the new homes bonus beyond six years on brownfield sites.building affordable homeswe will increase the supply of affordable housing by: identifying long-term dormant land held by central and local government so it can be released for affordable developments relax planning regulations for the conversion of off-high road commercial and office space and other existing buildings to affordable residential use.ukip will introduce policies to incentivise the creation of more affordable housing, while protecting rural communities and preserving our precious countryside.previous use and may have contamination issues to address can be off-putting to potential developers. this is despite the fact technology tobringing empty homes back into usehousing charity shelter reports there are 279,000 privately- owned long-term empty homes in england alone, while other bodies, such as the empty homes agency, put the figure much higher still. the most obvious way to create new homes is by bringing these empty homes back into use.we will place a statutory duty on local authorities to: include a commitment to bringing empty properties back into use within their broader housing and planning strategiesclean up sites and make them fit for new development is now readily available.we will take steps to remove the barriers to brownfield builds with the aim of building one million homes on brownfield sites by 2025 to address the current housing shortage.ukip will require the environment agency to compilea national brownfield sites register and provide a remediation assessment where appropriate. the following financial incentives will be offered to encourage developers to build on brownfield sites:believe in britainukip 2015 manifesto > page 34while these measures will help address the housing shortage, we cannot just build our way out of the housing crisis. our housing policy needs to be seen within a wider context of addressing the issue of supply and demand. controlling the numbers ofnew migrants coming to britain is one important part of the housing jigsaw.tackling homelessnessthere are no clear national statistics to tell us how many people are homeless in the uk. to give an indication of the scale of the problem, the autumn 2014 total of rough sleeping counts and estimates in england was 2,744, according to thegovernment. this was an increase of 14 per cent on 2013 figures. meanwhile, 112,070 people declared themselves homeless in england in 2013/4.the scale of homelessness in 2015 is morally reprehensible and ukip will seek to eliminate this national scandal.tackling homelessness starts with knowing who and where homeless people are, so they can be offered housing and other life opportunities. we willestablish a national homeless register to make it easier for those of no fixed abode to claim welfare entitlements; get access to medical and dental services; and enable support services to identify those at risk of physical, psychologicaland sexual abuse.local homes for local peopleukip will encourage moves by local authorities to prioritise people with strong local connections when making housing allocations.we will relieve pressure on social housing waiting lists by preventing foreign nationals from obtaining access to social housing until they have lived here and paid uk tax and national insurance for a minimum of five years. thisrestriction will not apply to foreign nationals with current social housing tenancies.right to buy and help to buyukip supports the principle of extending home ownership and giving people the right to own the homes they may have lived in for generations as social housing tenants. we will plough 100 per cent of all revenue from right to buy sales, after essential costs have been paid back, into new community housing.we will not allow non-british nationals access to the right to buy or help to buy schemes, unless they have served in her majestys armed forces.given that britains social housing stock is so massively oversubscribed, we do not believe it is either sensible or fair to give foreign nationals the opportunity to obtain social housing stock, buy their home at a discount and then sellit for an untaxed profit before moving back abroad. all local authorities, social landlords and housing associations will be required to register the nationality of their tenants in order to ensure this policy works in practice.in the same way, only british citizens will be permitted to access help to buy schemes.protecting our countrysideukip will not allow new housing to strip our nation of prime agricultural land. this must be kept for its primary purpose, creating a secure food supply for britain and for export. neither will we allow the countryside to be swamped by over-development: we believe strongly that our countryside must be preserved so it can be enjoyed by future generations.we will replace the current national planning policy framework (nppf) and introduce fresh national planning guidelines that will prioritise brownfield sites for new housing and genuinely protect the green belt.the nppf as it stands is disastrous for the environment. it has given developers the green light to build just about anywhere and seriously restricts the ability of local authorities to refuse planning permission for inappropriate developments.the tories promised localism, in their 2010 manifesto, saying they would give more power to local people but, in reality, their planning policies have stripped powers away from communities.ukip genuinely supports local communities having a greater say over what happens in their locality and we will: free local authorities from government-imposed minimum housing numbers reverse current policies of facilitating large-scale rural residential developments, promote smaller 6-12 unit developments in rural areas to extend existing villages encourage local authorities to require a proportion of self-build plots to be provided inall large developments allow large-scale developments to be overturned by a binding local referendumtriggered by the signatures of 5 per cent of electors within a planning authority area,collected within three months reduce the cost and bureaucracy of planning applications by merging planning andbuilding control departments in local authorities.supporting homeownersukip will change the law to allow mortgages to become inheritable, as they are in other countries. this will allow lenders to resume lending to older borrowers.ukip will not introduce any form of mansion tax.believe in britaintransportours is a nation always on the move. whether our daily journey takes us onthe school run or on a long, cross-country haul, everyone needs a reliable,cost-efficient transport network. we do not need extortionate vanity projects orexcessive regulations and motorists should not feel as if they are being used ascash cows to boost national or local government funds.ukip 2015 manifesto > page 36big brotherukip opposes pay-as you-go road chargingschemes and attempts to introduce themby stealth.jill seymour meptransport spokesmanit is time to scrap hs2in october 2013, lord mandelson, speaking in the house of lords about the labour governments decision to instigate the hs2 high-speed rail-link confessed that: it was a political trophy project justified on flimsy evidence.hs2 is running out of control. ukip will stop this flawed vanity scheme in its tracks.the estimated cost is already 50 billion and hs2 ltd is planning to spend over 800m in 2015/2016, before the project even gets the final go-ahead. the governments own estimates show the cost will never be recouped.hs2 will blight thousands of homes and wreak irreparable environmental damage across large tracts of central england.the argument that hs2 is needed to provide extra capacity has just weeks ago been questioned by the house of lords economic affairs committee, which concluded that: the government has not made a convincing case for why this particular project should go ahead.there is barely any evidence that hs2 will reduce the north- south divide: the north would get much quicker and higher benefit from investment in the infrastructure between northern towns and cities.hs2 is an unaffordable white elephant and, given other, far more pressing calls on public expenditure, such as the nhs, social care and defence, not to mention the need to reduce the deficit, it must face the axe.london airports and the south eastthe final report of the davies commission into airport capacity and connectivity in the uk will be published later this year. ukip will consider its recommendations and then take a position on the basis of what we genuinely believe to be in the long-term best interests of the country.however, we firmly believe that part of the solution to address the lack of airport capacity in the south east isto re-open manston airport. manston is ideally placed to take low-cost airlines and freight-only aircraft; it is close to the railway network; enjoys good connections to ashford international; will release additional capacity in the region; and take pressure off other airports.speed cameras and road safetyukip will only allow installation of speed cameras when they can be used as a deterrent at accident black spots, near schools and in residential areas where there are specific potential dangers. we will not permit speed cameras to be used as revenue- raisers for local authorities.ending road tollswe will remove road tolls where possible and let existing contracts on running road tolls expire. motorists are already taxed highly enough through fuel and vehicle taxes.big brother pay-as-you-go plansukip opposes pay-as-you-go road charging schemes and attempts to introduce them by stealth.from october 2015, the eu will require all new cars tobe fitted with the ecall system. ostensibly a road safety measure, this system tracks vehicles using gps and reports back to a central database. this capability would enable introduction of a europe-wide road pricing system, on a miles travelled basis, which the eu transport commissioner is keen to introduce. we will scrap mandatory fitments of ecall and allow owners who already have ecall installed to disable it on their vehicles.supporting our haulage industrythe driver certificate of professional competence (dcpc) is an expensive second-tier requirement, which iscausing job losses, because of the added administration and expense to hauliers. we will scrap the dcpc for professionally licensed drivers.the hgv road user levythis levy currently applies to hgv vehicles registered both in the uk and other eu countries, to comply with various eu directives.after leaving the eu the levy would cease to apply to uk vehicles, but the vehicle excise duty on uk vehicles would be adjusted by the equivalent amount to make this aspect of the change revenue neutral for both uk hauliers and the government.the current levy tariff will then be doubled to a maximum of 2000 per annum and only apply to foreign registered hgvs. this change will help uk hauliers to compete with european hauliers entering the uk, loaded with cheaper fuel bought on the continent.it will achieve exactly the same effect as ukips original britdisc proposal.caring for classic carsto help protect the enduring legacy of the motor industry and our classic and historic vehicles, ukip will exempt vehicles over 25 years old from vehicle excise duty.believe in britainenergyroger helmer mepenergy spokesmankeep the lights onbritain is sleepwalking into an energy crisis. families suffer as energy prices rise relentlessly. millions of us are living in fuel poverty.the three old parties collude to reinforce failing energy policies that will donothing to reduce global emissions, but which will bring hardship to britishfamilies. their green agenda does not make them friends of the earth;it makes them enemies of the people.ukip 2015 manifesto > page 38while our major global competitors - the usa, china, india - are switching to low-cost fossil fuels,we are forced to close perfectly good coal-fired power stations to meet unattainable targets forrenewable capacity. if we carry on like this, the lights are likely to go out.why? because the 2008 climate change act, an act rooted in eu folly, drives up costs, undermines competitiveness and hits jobs and growth. dubbed the most expensive piece of legislation in british history, the governments own figures put the cost of the act at 18 billion a year over 40 years, or 720 billion between 2010 and 2050.the climate change act is doing untold damage. ukip will repeal it.we will also scrap the large combustion plant directive and stop the eus planned medium combustion plant directive. both attempt to close down secure, reliable and economical electricity generation and replace it with expensive, intermittent, unreliable renewables. we will encourage the re-development of british power stations and industrial units providing on-site power generation.what is clearly unsafe is the uks over-dependence on imports from politically unstable countries. in the interests of energy security alone, the prospect of home-grown shale gas is an enormous opportunity it would be irresponsible to ignore.we will levy petroleum revenue tax (currently 50 per cent)on any shale profits and invest the income into a sovereign wealth fund. norway takes this approach, with great success.renewable energyukip supports and will invest in renewables, where they can deliver electricity at competitive prices. at the moment, the only major renewable technology that meets this test for affordability is hydro, so we will withdraw taxpayerand consumer subsidies for new wind turbines and solarif we are to have energy security and cheap, plentiful, reliable sources of energy, coal must be part of the solution.bearing this in mind, ukip will: set up a commission to investigate ways to assist and rejuvenate the coal industry seek to secure the survival and expansion of our indigenous coal industry in the form of deep, opencast and drift mining drop all subsidies for wind and solar power, to ensure a level playing field for coal discontinue the carbon floor tax on the basis that production for coal fired power stations is combined with carbon capture and storage halt the decline of coal power stations and seek private funding to develop new, efficient plants.cutting fuel billsin 2014, the government forced energy companies to add nearly 3.2 billion onto energy bills to finance their energy and climate change policies: that will have doubled to a staggering 9.8 billion by 2020, amounting to an extra 197 going onto our average domestic fuel bills.ukip will abolish green taxes and levies and withdraw from the eus emissions trading scheme, reducing fuel bills and enhancing industrial competitiveness at a stroke.we will also make the way you pay your bill fairer, by stopping energy companies charging extra for customers who use prepayment meters, who do not pay by direct debit, or who require paper billing.to deliver secure, affordable energy supplies, we supporta diverse energy market based on coal, nuclear, shale gas, conventional gas, oil, solar and hydro, as well as other renewables where these can be delivered at competitive prices.photovoltaic arrays, while respecting existing contractual arrangements.wind power is hopelessly inefficient and wind farms rely heavily on reserve back-up from conventional power sources. they have blighted landscapes and put money into theshale gas: time to get frackingukip supports the development of shale gas, provided safeguards are in place to protect local communities andthe environment. community infrastructure levy income from shale gas operations will be earmarked for lower council taxes or local community projects.no energy extraction technology is perfectly safe, but shale gas operations in the usa for instance, wheretens of thousands of shale wells have been drilled and fracked over five decades, have proved remarkably unproblematic, especially so by comparison to otherpockets of wealthy landowners and investors, while pushing up bills for the rest of us.investing in coalthe british coal industry once employed one million miners. now, all three remaining deep coal mines in britain are set to close by 2016, at a cost of 2,000 jobs, despite having many years of productive life left and regardless of our continuing need for coal. 30 per cent of our electricity is still produced from coal and we will be dependent on fossil fuels for many more years to come.methods of energy extraction.believe in britainemploymentbeing in the european union is damaging the prospects for british workers. uncontrolled mass immigration has driven down wages and for many jobs, the minimum wage is now the maximum wage. meanwhile, fewer new jobsare being created because of excess eu regulations. british workers will fare much better when we are out of the eu.british workersour promise to you: we will stand up for you and fight your corner.jane collins mepemployment spokesmanukip 2015 manifesto > page 40in 2007, the peugeot factory in ryton, coventry, closed and moved production to slovakia. this cost 2,300jobs. the eu pumped 78 million in subsidies into the new factory, while brussels sat on a request for auk subsidy of just 14 million, for two years.prime minister tony blair claimed the closure was the inevitable casualty of globalisation, but in fact the eu had made a conscious choice to boost the economy of slovakia, at the expense of the uk.in 2012, ford moved transit van production to non-eu turkey with the help of an 80 million loan from the european investment bank. 500 jobs were lost in southampton and 750 in dagenham.the sale of royal mail in 2013 and subsequent post office closures where both driven by the eu postal services directive. 1,300 jobs have reportedly been lost.these are just three examples of how interference from the eu leads to british job losses. british workers are suffering: eurostat, the eus own data service, revealed last year that eu migrants are more likely to be in work in britain than britons themselves. if we add to this the downward pressure on wages that has resulted from mass immigration, itis clear remaining in the eu is not favourable to british workers.by leaving the eu and restricting immigration through the use of an australian-style points based system, we will give back some hope to british workers for a brighter future.ukip will: restrict access to eures, the eu-wide jobs portal thathas become the go-to source for employers looking for cheap labour from overseas end the availability of eu relocation grants of up to1,000 for migrants to come and work in britain allow british businesses to choose to employ britishcitizens first. enforce the minimum wage and reverse thegovernment cuts in the number of minimum wage inspectors in both england and walesworkers rightsleaving the eu will not mean workers employment rights will be removed, simply that they will be adopted intouk law.some eu directives, such as the working time directive, need amending because they actively restrict the british work ethos and therefore our economy, but ukip will protect workers rights.zero-hours contractsthe use of zero-hours contracts proliferated following the imposition of the eus temporary agency workers directive, which demanded agency workers were given the same workplace rights as employees. zero-hours contracts enabled businesses to escape this edict. eu legislation, intended to benefit temporary workers, in fact ended up penalising them.because ukip recognises that zero-hours contracts suit many people, we will not ban them. we do, however, take a very dim view of their abuse and will introduce a legally binding code of conduct stipulating the following: businesses hiring 50 people or more must give workerson zero-hours contracts either a full or part-time secure contract after one year, if the workers involved request it there must be no exclusivity clauses in any zero-hourscontract. to prevent people from working elsewhere when they have no guarantee of regular work, will be banned workers on zero-hours contracts must be given at leasttwelve hours advance notice of work. once notice has been given, they must be paid for the work, regardless of whether or not they are actually needed. employers will not be permitted to expect a worker to turn up for work, only to be turned away again, when no work is available.the three million jobs mythfinally, a word on the pernicious myth that leaving the eu will cost three million british jobs. this myth grew out of a report by the national institute of economic and social research (niesr) in 2000, which concluded that 2.7 million jobs were directly related to our trade with the eu and another 500,000 were indirectly linked. the report went on to say that: there is no a priori reason to suppose that many of these [jobs], if any, would be lost permanently if britain were to leave the eu.the report was nevertheless spun by the pro-eu lobby, which tried to suggest jobs linked to eu trade, meant jobs were dependent on eu membership. the director of niesr repudiated their claims, describing their efforts as a wilful distortion of the facts. sadly, unscrupulous politicians, fully aware of the truth of the matter, still attempt to deceive.the jobs of british people - and the jobs of the five million europeans who work here  are not dependent on eu membership and will be safe when we leave the eu. to say otherwise is, quite simply, dishonest.believe in britainif you run a small business, then ukip is the party for you. we will do everything we can to help you be competitive in britain and the global market.margot parker mepsmall business spokesmanukip 2015 manifesto > page 42small businessat the start of last year, there were an estimated 5.2 million small businesses in the uk, togetheremploying over 12 million people and having a combined turnover of 1.2 trillion.we find our greatest innovators and entrepreneurs within our small businesses. the businesses they start and grow will take us out of the economic turmoil weve suffered in recent years and back into the black.yet, too often, our small businesses are not supported. they struggle to get finance to set up or expand their businesses. larger companies who dont pay invoices on time, damage their cash flow. business rates can be prohibitively high. excessive regulations stream out of brussels, adding huge administrative and financial burdens to the challenges already faced by small businesses. all this must stop.reducing business ratesbusiness rates as a tax are a great burden on business and especially so on small businesses, where they represent a disproportionately high fixed cost. the small business rate relief currently only applies up to a rateable value of 12,000, meaning many small and medium-sized businesses receive no relief at all. ukip recognises this often rapidly-growing sector needs much greater support and we will change thesmall business rate relief as follows: almost 90 per cent of business properties, over1.5 million in total, have a rateable value of less than 50,000, so are potentially eligible for this 20 per cent discount.late paymentsaccording to the department of business innovation and skills, more than 20 billion is locked up at any one time in delayed late payments from large companies (defined asa company with over 250 employees) to small suppliers of goods and services.small businesses find cash-flow tough enough in the current economic climate. the last thing they need is to be bullied into providing interest-free loans to their customers.it is not acceptable for big businesses to exploit smaller firms by deliberately delaying payments and ukip will take firm action to stop this practice.existing regulations are of little practical use: small businesses are reluctant to charge interest to customers and legal proceedings are expensive, time consuming and hardly an effective way to develop business relationships.ukip will introduce a scheme whereby small businesses will provide evidence of repeated late payments, beyond agreed terms, together with evidence that timely requests for payments have been made, to hm revenue and customs.based on the evidence - particularly if there are multiple complaints about the same company -hmrc can then carry out an inspection of that companys records.the identity of the complainant company will remain confidential.if the large company is found to be systematically exceeding its contractual terms of payment with small businesses, a sanction of significant fines, proportionate to the extent of the abuse of terms, will be levied.fines would escalate for repeat offenders and be noted in the offending companys statutory accounts.ukip will also end a growing practice whereby large companies extend their payment terms to small companies, by arranging for their supplier to take out a bank loan to facilitate their demands.if a business has only one property and the rateablevalue is less than 50,000, the business will get 20 per cent rate relief if the business has more than one property, the 20per cent rate relief will still apply, provided the total rateable value of all properties is less than 50,000 other existing business rate reliefs will not beaffected and will apply where the relief provided under those schemes is greater than 20 per centbelieve in britainaccess to financedespite schemes such as funding for lending and the finance guarantee, small businesses still find it difficult to secure funding in the current economic climate. while banks do of course have to consider risk, the lack of funding for small businesses will remain a drag on growth.small businesses themselves have to consider what credit terms they offer to their own customers. they are understandably fearful of bad debts.to address both this issues, ukip will pilot a scheme to improve access to trade credit insurance to small businesses. this insurance already exists in the market, but can prove restrictive for smaller companies, especially in certain business sectors.under our scheme, existing credit insurance providers will assess risk as they do now, independent of government involvement, but government would back a portion of the risk to enable cover to be provided more widely.the security this policy provides will give small businesses the confidence to expand trade, while enhancing the attractiveness of their loan book as a more secure asset against which banks can lend them money. if successful, this pilot will be rolled out nationally.ukip 2015 manifesto > page 44encouraging local tradebusinesses in our town centres  and shops in particular - have suffered as aresult of the dramatic increase in out-of-town trading estates and supermarkets. ukip believes our town centres should be vibrant and profitable and that means encouraging locals, visitors and tourists into town, by removing barriers that act as a disincentive, such as expensive or restricted parking.we will push every local authority in the country to offer at least30 minutes free parking in town centres, high streets and shopping parades, to encourage shoppers into our town centres and boost local business.cutting red tapemassive over-regulation by the european union impacts disproportionately on smaller businesses. fewer than one in ten british businesses trade with the eu, yet 100per cent of them must comply with thousands of eu laws on employment, waste management, environmental regulations, product registration, health and safety and so on. this burden can be overwhelming for small firms.a report by business for britain concluded that 3,580 new laws passed between 11 may 2010 and 1 october 2013 affected british business, with legislation running to over 13 million words. the eus most costly regulations cost britain an estimated 27.4 billion a year, according to 2013 research by think-tank open europe. the federation of small business says 61 per cent of small companies cite the regulatory burden as a significant factor when closing or downsizing.ukip will repeal eu regulations and directives that stifle business growth. we will also allow traders to sell in whatever quantities or measuresthey like. only ukip will get us out of the eu and releaseenterprise from the strangulation excessive regulation.public sector contractsbelieve in britainukip will make it easier for small and medium-sized businesses with 250 employees or less to tender for public sector contracts, by removing the necessity to demonstrate compliance in areas irrelevant to the job being tendered for. this will benefit smaller companies and cut costs to the taxpayer.the bigger pictureukips support for small businesses can be seen in many other policy areas too. for instance, small businesses will also get a boost from our policies to: allow young people to start an apprenticeship in place of fournon-core subjects at gsce level abolish tuition fees for those studying science, technology,engineering, maths and medicine allow employers to prioritise british citizens for jobs maintain suitable levels of immigration to fill the skills gap cut fuel bills through the abolition of green levies to cutbusiness costs.ukip believes in britains small businesses, in its entrepreneurs, in its teams of sole traders, freelancers and self-starters and will back them wheneverand however we can.believe in britainfarming and the countrysidefarmers like myself have everything to gain byleaving the eu. ukip has sound policies that willput british farmers first, promote high standards inanimal husbandry and help secure a vibrant, thrivingagriculture sector for britainbackingukip 2015 manifesto > page 46britishfarmersstuart agnew mepagriculture spokesmanfarming is vital to britain, especially now, when we have more mouths to feed than ever before. our food security, our economy, our relationship with the countryside, howwe protect our environment: all these issues are linked intrinsically to farming.outside the eu, free of the common agricultural policy (cap) and excessive regulations, we will be able to introduce fairer, simpler ways to support farmers. for every 1 british agriculture receives from the cap, the british taxpayerhas already contributed 2, so we can easily continue to subsidise farmers after leaving the eu. we can also re- distribute payments away from wealthy landowners and large, often intensively farmed holdings, in favour of smaller food producers and family farms.a new uk single farm paymentukip will introduce a modified uk single farm payment (sfp) scheme of 80 per acre for lowland farms, with comparable arrangements for lower grades of land, capped at 120,000. golf courses, airfields, racetracks and other non-productive areas will be excluded, as will land usedfor solar panels or land within 25 metres of a wind turbine. land must conform to 2013 entry level stewardship (els) requirements, where points are accrued according to criteria such as hedgerow maintenance, wild bird cover, wild flower mixes, etc., to qualify for subsidies. organic farms will be paid a 25 per cent premium on the sfp ukip will add rare breed maintenance to the els points system there will be no set-aside, cropping or rotation restrictions sfp will be paid to who ever takes financial responsibility for the farming enterprise on a field-by- field basis (i.e. the farmer, not the landowner) hill farmers will receive additional headage payments on livestock numbers within world trade organisation rules.dairy and sheep farmersukip will support dairy farmers by requiring the competition commission to promote fair practice in thefood chain, in addition to considering price and competition issues. this will allow producers to create larger co- operatives and alliances to counter the power of purchasing cartels. we will also refine the brief of the grocery adjudicator, who arbitrates on trade relationships between the large retailers and their suppliers, if necessary.we will scrap the electronic individual identification document for sheep, and introduce a pragmatic solution to distinguish between lamb and mutton at the abattoir, reducing costs for farmers by changing the definition of an aged sheep.caring for our environmentukip will match-fund grants made by local authorities towards rural capital projects, such as creating a lake, wetland, repairing traditional stone walls, etc. which enhance the local environment, encourage rural education, or help recovery from environmental disasters.while we will abolish excessive and unnecessary regulations and directives, keeping those necessary to protect our environment, or replacing them with more appropriate controls, administered at national or local government level, will be a priority for us. we will take as our guide in these and all other farming matters relevant scientific and/or professional veterinary advice.genetically modified foodsukip supports research into gm foods, including research on the benefits and risks involved to the public. we will allow a free vote in parliament on commercial cultivation.food labellingfood labelling will come back under the control of the westminster parliament when we leave the eu. then we can insist animal products are labelled to show the country of origin, method of production and transport and whether the animal was stunned before slaughter, together with anyinformation concerning hormones and gm products. we believe strongly that customers have the right to see this information.animal health and welfarewe can only regain control of animal health and welfare by leaving the eu. ukip takes both issues seriously and we will: triple the maximum jail sentences for animal cruelty and torture impose lifetime bans on owning and/or looking after animals on any individual or company convicted of animal cruelty or torture keep the ban on animal testing for cosmetics challenge companies using animals for testing drugs or other medical treatments on the necessity for this form of testing, as opposed to the use of alternative technology tightly regulate animal testing ban the export of live animals for slaughter insist on formal non-stun training and certification for all religious slaughtermen to ensure the highest standards are adhered to install cctv in every abattoir, monitored by the meat hygiene service, and deal severely with any contraventions. remove unnecessary eu restrictions that make small, local abattoirs unviablewe will also prepare for the possibility of disease outbreaks (including those) caused by imports. we cannot expect our farmers to bear the full brunt of any such outbreaks, but we will encourage them to introduce testing programmes and invest in insurance schemes to deal with potential outbreaks, as the poultry sector has done with the salmonella testing programme and associated insurance scheme.believe in britainby the time trevor sells the two boxes of whelks hes caught today, he will make the grand sum of about 45, before costs such as fuel for his boat. eu quotas mean hes not allowed to catch anything else. this is how utterly ridiculous the common fisheries policy is: it is destroying our fishing industry and we must take back control from brussels.ray finch mepfisheries spokesmanukip 2015 manifesto > page 48fishingsave our fishermenthe eu is simply not interestedin sustainable british fishingbelieve in britainthe eu common fisheries policy (cfp) was designed from the beginning to steal our fish.it has ravaged our fishing industry and caused catastrophic environmental damage. fishinggrounds have been so over-fished that some are at the point of collapse. our fishing fleet ishalf its former size.britains seas should be the jewel in her crown, but we surrendered these priceless family treasures when we joined the then eec 1973 and our territorial waters were merged into one giant european fishery.the uk has almost 70 per cent of europes fishing grounds but only 13 per cent percent of its fishing quota. so, we must import fish species such as cod, haddock and huss that our own fishermen are forced to throw overboard usually dead - because of eu rules. the eu itself estimates 40 per cent of all fish caught are discarded, so as much as two million tons of perfectly edible fish are wasted every year. the eus proposed discard ban will not fix this problem, just move it onshore.worse, while preaching conservation, the eu allows industrial fishing techniques such as electric pulse trawling, which destroys marine life and disturbs the ecological balance of our seascapes.we can only replenish britains bounty of fish and restore our fishing industry if we leave the eu and withdraw from the cfp. then we can: enforce no-take zones to aid spawning and replenish fish stocks protect our coastal eco system by ending destructive industrial fishing practices end the slaughter of dolphins by banning pair trawler fishing for bass work with our fishermen to solve discard and landing issues reverse any eu-wide drift-net ban in british waters  issue permits for foreign trawlers once fish stockshave returned to sustainable levels.fishing boats under 10 metressmaller fishing boats make up the majority of the uk fleet but only receive only 4 per cent of the english quota, while the five largest foreign-controlled vessels take 32 per cent. it is grossly unfair and damages fish stock sustainability. small-scale inshore fishing is the backbone of the uk fishing industry and we will end this injustice.sea anglingover 750,000 people enjoy sea angling in the uk. it is a profitable hobby for britain: vat income from sea angling is worth more than the value of all commercial landings and some 23,000 jobs depend on sea angling, yet the eu is planning to restrict anglers to catching just three sea bassa day. we suspect this will eventually lead to eu controls on all angling and we will vociferously oppose this threat.we will ensure sea anglers and our under 10-metre boat fleet are represented on the marine management organisation, which licenses, regulates and plans marine activities in the seas around england and wales. at present, noneof the fifteen board members are fishermen.the eu is just not interested in sustainable fishing.if we want to eat fish in the future, we mustpreserve our fishing industry and our marine ecology. we can only dothis if we escape the cfp and introduceour own sustainable fishing practice. establish a 12-mile zone around our coastline for uk fishermen and a 200-mile exclusive economic zone under uk control, as is our right under international lawreverse the rapid decline in our fishing industry and return 2.5 billion a year in fish sales to the uk economybelieve in britainheritage and tourismukip is the only party that actively works toprotect our green and pleasant land from thethreat of over-development and secure ourhistoric buildings for future generations.we will also fight to save the great british pub.ukip 2015 manifesto > page 50william cashheritage and tourism spokesmanour historic market towns, cathedral cities and unspoilt countryside are the envy of the world.from our norman castles to battersea power station, our heritage is an important part of our vibrant tourist industry, which supports three million jobs and contributes 127 billion annually to our economy.putting heritage and tourism back on the mapheritage was a dirty word in labours cool britannia. tony blair moved the department of national heritage into the department for culture, media and sport and marginalised tourism by lumping it in with the responsibilities of the minister for sports and equalities.the conservatives bulldozer instincts kicked in when the chancellor removed the zero rate of vat on listed building repairs. maintenance bills for over 400,000 of our most beautiful buildings, owned by a surprisingly diverse socio- economic group of people, were hiked by 20 per cent. developers putting identikit houses on greenbelt land, meanwhile, paid no vat.ukip will end this discrimination against our historic legacy by: - creating a dedicated minister of state for heritage and tourism, attached to the cabinet office ensuring tax and planning policies support historic buildings and the countryside removing vat completely from repairs to listed building introducing a presumption in favour of conservation as opposed to the current presumption in favour of development in planning legislation.the great british seasidetoo many seaside destinations face pressing economic, social and housing issues. old former large hotels that once sat grandly on our seafront have become houses of multiple occupation, or low-cost hostels. the result, bedsit land, deters families, young professionals and retired people from moving to the area and deters business investment.ukip will fuel regeneration in coastal areas, transforming them into vibrant, growing communities by bestowing seaside town status to areas in need of regeneration. this will give local authorities the power to: access low-interest government loans to buy upand renovate poor housing stock and convert empty commercial properties into residential accommodation issue compulsory purchase order powers for poor- quality multi-occupancy accommodation allow local authorities to introduce minimum standards for properties in receipt of housing benefit restructure local housing markets so they are not excessively driven by profits from housing benefit income refuse housing benefit payments to landlords in breach of planning legislation.we will boost the coastal communities fund and expand its remit to: end the scattergun approach, which sees funding allocated according to income from a particular area, rather than supporting nationwide regeneration prioritise larger-scale heritage, residential, retail and tourist regeneration over smaller scale projects encourage regenerative arts projects into our coastal towns.ukips save the pub campaignwe are very proud of our save the pub campaign!the uk has lost 21,000 pubs since 1980, mostly as a result of taxation, regulation, the recent decline in disposable incomes and long-term cultural changes. the smoking ban and the alcohol duty escalator are estimated to be responsible for some 6,000 pub closures.to reverse this trend we will: offer tax breaks to smaller breweries to encourage micro-breweries keep the current excise duty scheme that exempts from duty cider and perry made by small domestic producers amend the smoking ban to give pubs and clubs the choice to open smoking rooms provided they are properly ventilated and physically separated from non- smoking areas. workers must not be required to enter smoking areas except for cleaning and other essential purposes when they are not in use oppose minimum pricing of alcohol and reverse plain paper packaging legislation for tobacco products.our history is the envy of the world. ukip will keep it that way.believe in britaincrime and justicecuts to the police force, a plethora of insidious eu directives, poorjudgements from the european court of justice that trample onthe rights of victims: all these have eroded trust and confidence inpolicing and our judicial and prison systems. our internal nationalsecurity has never felt so undermined.ukip 2015 manifesto > page 52diane james mephome affairs spokesmansince 2010 our internal national security has been weakened again and again. it is ukips intention todraw a line under the cuts suffered by our police, prison and criminal justice services and provide themwith adequate resources.we must get our law enforcement agencies back into a fit state, so they can deliver the protection british citizens have set great store by in the past and which we have a right to expect in the future. in addition to boosting the border agency by 2,500 we will also put 3,500 more front line personnel into the police and prison services.removing the eus handcuffsour membership of the european union and associated acceptance of the free movement of people principle means we are unable to prevent criminals arriving on our shores. truly horrific, tragic crimes have been committed in britain by foreign criminals with long records in their home countries and petty criminality has risen as gangs of thieves, pickpockets and scammers have arrived from overseas to target the uk.we must leave the eu to prevent those with criminal convictions coming here. by opening the borders to convicted criminals, previous governments have put us at unacceptable risk. we have been badly let down.ukip will do its utmost to deport foreign criminals and prevent those with criminal records from entering britain, when we leave the eu. this will help protect our nation, free up prison places and relieve some of the stress on the prison service.human rights legislationputting responsibility for law and order back into the hands of parliament is key to ukips approach to law and order, justice and internal security across the british isles.we will remove ourselves from the jurisdiction of the european court of human rights: the strasbourg court whose interpretation of the european convention of human rights has been known to put the rights of criminals above those of victims. our own supreme court will act as the final authority on matters of human rights.we will also repeal labours human rights legislation. it has given european judges far too much power over british law making and law enforcement and prevented us deporting terrorists and career criminals and from implementing whole-life sentences.our human rights will be enshrined in law via the introduction of a new, consolidated uk bill of rights. this will complement the un declaration of human rights and encapsulate all the human and civil rights that uk citizens have acquired under uk law since magna carta. this new uk bill of rights will apply across england, wales, scotland and northern ireland.innocent until proven guiltyukip will fully uphold the principle of innocent until proven guilty. this tenet of law is fundamental to british justice and ukip will reverse the opt-in to eu law and justice measures, which disregard this fundamental principle, includingthe european arrest warrant and european investigation orders, which were enacted by the coalition partners and supported by labour.the uk policeausterity cuts have forced cuts to policing numbersthat have gone too far, placing citizen safety and trust in policing at severe risk. ukip is committed to returning toa meaningful capita population-based policing resource. serving officers should not be subjected to undue stress as a result of being over-stretched.believe in britaincrime is not a lifestyle option ukip will tolerate. the more visible police we have on our streets, themore criminals are reminded of this fact and the more the public are reassured.reducing the numbers of territorial constabularies nationwide will release finance onto the front line: we question whether 43 constabularies, each with a multiplicity and duplication of roles, is either a viable situationor one suited to delivering operational efficiency. this will not be a top-down process however, but an expert, police-led approach, leading to collaboration and co-operation between constabularies and policing bodieswith the aim of producing structures more relevant to policing in 21st century britain.we will also reduce the number of police and crime commissioners in line with our objective of a reduction in the number of territorial constabularies to save money and tackle serious crime.the pcc role and remit will be reviewed before the next set of pcc elections to identify  best practice  that has been achieved across the country. the findings of this exercise will be used to establish a new terms of reference and role specification for the remaining pccs to ensure that they are  fit for purpose  regardingthe identified challenges for policing and the criminal justice system as a whole. we will also:crime and sentencingthe nature of crime has changed dramatically. the internet, impossible to police completely, is growing as a medium to commission and commit crime. up to one third of women report being the victim of domestic violence, yet in itself it is not an offence. there is confusion concerning laws on carrying potentially lethal weapons. while we once believed we had abolished slavery, people trafficking is increasing and modern- day slavery is a harsh reality.ukip believes it is time for a review of what is and what is not a criminal offence and we will commit to such a review, together with a review of commensurate sentencing policy to address the changing nature of crime today. the emphasis of such a review is likely to be on up to date sentencing procedures and processes for internet/cyber crime, sexual crime relating to minors, fraud, aggression, intimidation, people trafficking and gang masters and drug & substance abuse.our overall approach to crime is one of firmness, coupled with deterrent and rehabilitative strategies and a focus on combatting crime that delivers clear social value outcomes. we are also clear that the interests of law-abiding citizens and victims must always take precedence over those of criminals.ukip 2015 manifesto > page 54 commit to keeping sworn and warranted officers under the service of the crown. ukip will not outsource or privatise uk policing refuse to allow the introduction or deployment of the euro gendarmerie force within the uk invest in new technology such as communications equipment and personal cctv to combat crime ensure britains police forces comply with the law and do not retain booking photographs, fingerprints, dna, or biometric data of individuals who have not been convicted of a crime seek to match the make-up of the police force to the uks population profile introduce an accredited system for police recruitment in line with ukip policy on apprenticeships and vocational training.we also pledge the following: we will prosecute all cases of adult sexual behaviour with under-age minors. the age of consent will not be reviewed or changed we will adopt a zero tolerance approach to cultural practices that are either illegal or which conflict with british values and customs, including forced marriages, female genital mutilation and so-called honour killings. we will enforce the law and prosecute where necessary ukip will seek to introduce new personal weapons legislation to reflect progress made on knife crime and combat the many different kinds of items now used to injure, disfigure or kill we will not decriminalise illegal drugs, however we will focus on ensuring drug suppliers, not their victims, face the full force of the law we will update licensing laws in response to calls from local authorities to limit the maximum stake on fixed-odds betting terminals from 100 down to 2, to tackle problem gambling and anti-social behaviour.prisoners will not be given the vote. those who have lost their rightto liberty by committing a serious crime should also lose their ability to vote. voting is a civic right, not a human right.dealing with foreign criminalsthere is significant public concern about the ability of convicted foreign criminals first to gain entry to the uk and subsequently to obtain british citizenship. ukip will not allow this to continue. if they have been convicted of any crime, foreign nationals will potentially forfeit any entitlement to a uk passport and to unrestricted entry to the country.we will decriminalise one crime: non-payment of the tv licence fee. this will become a civil rather than a criminal offence. we will also review the cost ot the licence fee with a view to its reduction.we will introduce a fast-track deportation programme to safeguard our national security and ease overcrowding and pressure on our prison service. foreign prisoners in receipt of custodial sentences will be returned to their country of origin. if they choose to launch an appeal, they must do so from theiruk prisonsan early priority for ukip will be to re-establish prison capacity. we will not risk allowing sentencing or parole hearings to be influenced by a lack of prison places.in the first instance, we will free up prison space by removing foreign criminals, of which there were over 10,000 in prisons in england and wales, according to the last reported figures from the house of commons library.we support purpose-built prison facilities and the upgrade of older prisons, but will not reduce prison place numbers, or force an artificial reduction in prisoner capacity via any means.if criminals do the crime, they can expect to serve the time.rehabilitation and reintegration into society for all prisoners is a ukip priority, so it is essential that prisoners have sufficient numeracy and literacy skills to re-enter the workplace. we will introduce a system whereby suitably qualified prisoners will be paid to teach prisoners with a low standard of literacy and numeracy. prisoners must sign an education covenant requiring them to complete their studies on release. any money earned in prison must first be used to pay any compensation due to victims and thereafter towards further studies.home country, or the country to which they are deported. they must also pay their own costs, or their home nation must fund their case. this policy will benefit the uk tax payer; is fair to all criminals regardless of origin; and reinstates uk judicial control.dna testing and retention of dna data results will be reinstated for all convicted foreign criminals. this, in our view, is a major preventative step towards protecting uk citizens and our front-line security forces. we will amend the protection of freedoms act 2012 to enable the police to continue to keep samples from foreign suspects who are arrested but not charged in britain.british justice is still the best in the world, but is being corrupted by the eu. unelected bureaucrats in brussels and judges in strasbourg and luxembourg, can ignore british fears about crime. it is time to bring our british legal system back under british control.believe in britainukip 2015 manifesto > page 56for englishpolitical reformpolitics in britain has become a cartel. many mps onlybecame mps by working in the office of mps. instead of answering outward to their constituents, too many mps only answer to other mps in westminster. we need fundamental change to reconnect politics with the public.douglas carswellenglish voteslawsukip will end the unfairness of mps from devolved nations voting on english-only issues.with party whips wielding so much power, parliament has grown supine and often spineless.instead of challenging ministers, too many mps simply do what their whips tell them.parliamentary questions are planted. debates are rigged. prime ministers question timegenerates a lot of heat, but sheds little light.ukip wants far reaching political reform to ensure that government answers properly to parliament and that parliament is accountable to the people. we will introduce: the citizens initiative: every two years we willallow a national referendum on the issues of greatest importance to the british public, gathered via an approved petition, provided the petition has more than two million signatures. the outcome of these referendums will be included in the queens speech, therefore allowing the public to directly influence legislation. we will also pledge to put matters gathering over 100,000 signatures on the commons order paper, to make sure they are genuinely debated and voted upon, not simply brushed over, as currently happens the right of recall: ukip will give voters real power to sack their mp and scrap the bogus recall measures introduced by the tory-led coalition. under our proposals, if twenty per cent of an mps constituents demand it, within a period of eight weeks, a recall ballot will be triggered. we will extend this right of recall to all elected politicians, e.g. councillors an open primaries bill: ukip will introduce an open primaries bill to enable any political parties that wished to do so to widen their selection process to include every local voter. open primary ballots would help ensure candidates in winnable seats need not be westminster insiders.as well as making mps more accountable to the public, ukip will make government answer more directly to parliament. we will introduce: confirmation hearings: these will require commons select committees to vote to approve the appointment of any new minister, senior civil servant or senior diplomat before they get the job. they will also have the power to veto such appointments. the same rules will apply to senior appointments to quangos and inspection bodies, such as ofsted expenditure hearings: until the 1930s, mps were able to amend public spending plans. since then they can only can only cheer or boo government spending plans, which are presented to them as a fait accompli. in order to control public spending and reduce taxes over time, ukip will give the relevant commons select committee the power to veto items of spending, but not increase them.voting reformin an age of multi-party politics, our current first past the post parliamentary election system is unfair and no longer fit for purpose. most mps are elected by a minority of their voters and perhaps with as little as 26 per cent of the vote share.ukip believes voters should know that every vote counts. we want an electoral system where each voter can vote for the party they really believe in, rather than against one they do not, for tactical reasons.ukip will campaign for a new, proportional voting system that delivers a parliament truly reflective of the number of votes cast, while retaining a constituency link, so every vote really does count.we will also: restrict the entitlement to vote in british general elections to british citizens and, potentially, countries which have reciprocal voting rights for british citizens, such as ireland scrap the failing electoral commission and independent parliamentary standards authority(ipsa) and merge their functions into a new political standards authority under new independent leadership and a cross-party board of governance with voting lay members remove postal voting on demand. we will scrap the existing postal vote register completely and start again from scratch. those wishing to have a postal vote must have a valid reason for applying.we will not allow postal voting on demand. it is open to fraud on such a scale that election rigging isnow a real possibility and perhaps even a probability in some areas. we cannotallow banana republic voting fraud in britain.believe in britainukip 2015 manifesto > page 58local governmentukip will bring back power to the people with common sense, local policies which will make peoples lives easier. ukip councillors know who is boss: we only answer to you and we are known for rolling up our sleeves and getting the job done!cllr peter reevelocal government spokesmanlocal authorities have significant power in matters concerning planning andhousing, education, local refuse and recycling facilities, parks and leisure facilities,transport, libraries and keeping local people safe.too often, elected councillors put party politics ahead of taxpayers when making decisions on these important matters. ukip believes councils should exist to serve their communities first and we will put power back where it belongs: in the hands of local people.we will: - continue to give ukip councillors the freedom to vote how they choose. we believe the community is their boss and they will not be whipped to bloc vote like councillors in other political parties keep council tax as low as possible oppose excessive development and actively seek to protect our countryside and greenspaces give local people control over planning, by giving them the final say on major planning decisions, such as out-of-town large-scale supermarket developments, wind turbines, incinerators, solar farms and major housing developments, through the use of binding local referenda adopt a zero tolerance approach to anti-social behaviour and crack down on nuisance and noisy neighbours make the setting up of a traveller pitch without permission illegal reinstate weekly bin collections where local communities have lost them and want them reinstated oppose the cabinet system of governance, which puts too much power in the hands of too few people and advocate a committee system which brings more openness, transparency and cross-party collaborative working seek at all times to give council tax payers best value for money by: cutting excessive allowances for councillors slashing excessive pay deals and golden handshakes for council executives limiting the number of highly-paid council employees cutting advertising and self-promotion budgets building partnerships to reduce costs abolishing non-essential jobs and red tape.ukip will also undertake a full review of all the many statutory duties national government places on local government, with a view to reducing the burden on councils.believe in britainbritish culturebelieve in britainwe are more than just a star on someone elses flagukip 2015 manifesto > page 60when did patriotism become something to be discouraged? it can be a unifying force for good. there is nothing extreme about wanting to celebrate britishness and it is about time we started doing so again.peter whittleculture and communities spokesmanukip believes in britain. we believe britain can be a strong, proud, independent,sovereign nation. we are the envy of the world for our rich history, our art and ourarchitecture, our monarchy.we led the way in the abolition of the slave trade. our industrial revolution transformed the world. a plethora of great britons stream through international history. our language is the most widely spoken on the planet.britain is a remarkable country and we are a remarkable people. we have helped shape the modern world. britain is more than just a star on someone elses flag.the liberal metropolitan elite often tells us patriotismis wrong, that it is something to be discouraged. we are told we should be ashamed of our past; that we must apologise for it. hints are dropped that wanting to celebrate britishness is an act that touches on extremism.we in ukip, along with the vast majority of the british people, beg to differ. we are not afraid to talk about the kind of country we are, have been, and indeed, want to be in the future. neither are we afraid to tackle head-on cultural issues of crucial importance. this clearly distinguishes us from the other parties, who have sought to denigrate our historic values of sovereignty, democracy, independence, patriotism and freedom by handing responsibility for governance over to the eu.reinvigorating british culture and valuesukip will promote a unifying british culture, open to anyone who wishes to identify with britain and british values, regardless of their ethnic or religious background. this is genuine inclusiveness.we reject multiculturalism, the doctrine whereby different ethnic and religious groups are encouraged to maintain all aspects of their cultures, instead of integrating into our majority culture, even if some of their values and customs conflict with british ones. we believe multiculturalism has led to an alarming fragmentation of british society.ukip does want people to integrate and, because we believe in britain, we are also committed to promoting the english language as a common ingredient that will bind our society together.with these aims in mind, ukip will: end the use of multi-lingual formatting on official documents. these will be published only in english and, where appropriate, welsh and gaelic uphold freedom of speech within the law as a fundamental british value. we believe all ideas and beliefs should be open to discussion and scrutiny and we will challenge the culture of offence as it risks shutting down free speech recognise that british values include tolerance of religion. ukip is committed to protecting religious freedoms for all believers in the uk, in accordance with article 18 of the universal declaration of human rights. we believe, however, that those faiths and beliefs must exist firmly within a british framework. we will not condone any faith position which is itself intolerant and refuses to recognise the human rights of others uphold the integrity of british law, ensuring it applies to all, equally. we will not condone parallel or conflicting systems that deny equality under the law insist that those attending faith-based tribunals must be informed that they cannot be forced to attend and that the rulings from such hearings may not be legally binding under british law review funding for public bodies which promote divisiveness through multiculturalism introduce a mandatory reporting requirement for suspected cases of female genital mutilation (fgm)for front-line professionals such as teachers, social services, gps, nurses and police. this will be supported by the inclusion of fgm awareness into safeguarding training for teachers, school staff and governors.taking pride in britainwe need to take pride in our country again and claim back our heritage from the chattering classes who have denigrated our culture, highlighted our failings as a country, rather than celebrating our successes, and tried to make us ashamed to be british.ukip will encourage pride in britain among our young people, who have become detached from our national cultural heritage. ukip supports a chronological understanding of british history and achievements in the national curriculum, which should place due emphasis on the unique influence britain has had in shaping the modern world.ukip will declare st georges day, 23rd april a bank holiday in england and st davids day, 1st march, in wales.believe in britaintradewe do not need to be in political union with the eu in order totrade with the eu. britain will continue to trade with the eu afterbrexit and to say otherwise is a deliberate deceit on the electorsof our country. leaving means we can increase our trade reachin the worlds growing markets, on our own, for ourselves,without being shackled to an over-bureaucratic, failingeu market that dilutes our influence and produceslittle except low economic growth and highunemployment.william dartmouth meptrade spokesmanukip 2015 manifesto > page 62the longer we stay in the european union, the more we become like little englanders,an isolated, insignificant, offshore province in a country called europe. we become lessand less like the great britain we really are.we are a global trading nation, a g7 country, the worlds fifth largest economy. the uk is the fourth largest exporter of goods worldwide; the seventh largest manufacturing nation; a permanent member of the un security council; a founder-member of the world bank and the commonwealth of nations; one of the major players in nato. english is the most widely-spoken business language and london the worlds leading international financial centre.is it astonishing how many politicians claim we are too small to go it alone. these blinkered doomsayers are not just unpatriotic, they are very, very wrong.out of the eu and into the worldprior to joining the eu, britain struck her own trade deals and traded freely across the globe. we surrendered our trade negotiating rights when we signed up to what was then the eec and vacated our seat on the world trade organisation (wto). britain has not negotiated a single trade deal since 1975 and, while we remain in the eu, we will never negotiate one again.ukip believes we can trade again, very successfully, by re-activating our seat at the wto, where we can negotiate as a full and independent member.eu trade myths explodedwe do not have to be members of the eu in order to trade with the eu, or any other country. more than sixty non-eu countries have trade deals with the eu. in 2013, the top twenty of these, countries such as switzerland, norway, hong kong, canada, nigeria, mexico and australia, together exported goods and services worth 2.593 trillion to eucountries, according to the eus own figures, more than our entire economy in the same year.moreover, six of the top ten countries that export to the eu do not have a trade agreement with the eu at all: china, russia, the usa, japan, india and brazil.being in the eu is no guarantee of greater financial rewards than being out in terms of trade: non-eu switzerland, with an economy one-quarter the size of ours, exports four and a half times more to the eu, per capita, than the uk does.the inconvenient truth for our europhile political class is that political union offers no advantages to trade, although it may inhibit it. we export more to the usa  some 40 billion annually  than we do to either france or germany, our largest eu markets, without having to become the fifty-first american state and without the free movement of people between our nations.trade on brexit, british exit from the euonce the uk leaves the eu, we, as a country, regain our ability to take back our vacant seat at the wto and represent ourselves, negotiating our own trade agreements and advancing our own national trade interests. a first step would be to broker a bespoke uk-eu trade agreement, which we believe is desirable. this is what we will seek and without doubt achieve, possibly within a very short period of time.the uk has been a leader in international trade for centuries, long before the european union. we will continue to trade internationally after brexit, enjoying the rights inherent in the wtos most favoured nation principle.we will regain full autonomy at the world customs organisation, the organisation for security and cooperationin europe, and several of the uns constituent bodies - all of which have seen a steady erosion of our voting powers, as the eu has assumed primacy. with over 100 other international organisations counting the uk as a full member, we will be in a very strong negotiating position when we leave the eu.suggestions that the eu would refuse to negotiate a trade deal with britain if we left the union are nothing more than scaremongering. britain is the eurozones biggest export market worldwide, the eurozones biggest supplier worldwide, and the country with which theeurozone has the biggest trade surplus worldwide. the truth is, the eu cannot afford to snub us: the eu actuallyneeds us far more than we needthe eu.it is time to free britain from the shackles of the eu. we have a choice between adying europe and a vibrant, growing world; a choicebetween staying buried in the bureaucraticnightmare of brussels, and resuming ourproper place in the rest of the world.the common sense answer is to leave.believe in britaindefencethe world is aflame with conflict, yet our armed forces have been cutto the bone. we need a well-resourced, properly manned and fit-for-purpose defence capacity, but our ability to defend british interestsaround the world is now seriously inhibited. our security at home isthreatened, and cuts have put additional strain on alreadyover-stretched and under-resourced troops.ukip 2015 manifesto > page 64mike hookem mepdefence spokesmanthe government continues to signal its intention to widen engagement in international conflictswhile, at the same time, implementing a crippling round of further military spending cuts,under the auspices of the 2010 strategic defence and security review (sdsr).the army is tasked with reducing personnel numbers to 82,000 by 2018, down from 102,500 in 2010. battle tank strength has been cut by 40 per cent and there has been a 35 per cent cut in self-propelled artillery. the conservatives ambition to recruit 30,000 personnel to the territorial army is failing.together, the royal air force and the royal navy have suffered more than 10,000 job losses. the nimrod maritime patrol aircraft programme has been cancelled. the aircraft carrier fleet has been decommissioned, despite having no operational replacements available until 2020. these cuts have demoralised our armed forces and left the nation unprepared to face emerging threats.rebuilding our armed forcesour current level of military spending and staffing is not fulfilling the terms of our nato membership - which requires that we spend 2 per cent of gdp on defence - and the government has failed to lay out details of spending plans beyond 2015/16.on the basis that the current base level of defence spending is maintained after 2015/16 at 1.9 per cent, ukip will increase the defence budget to meet our obligations to nato and spend 2 per cent of gdp on defence in 2015/16. we will exceed it substantially for the remaining years of the parliament.we will phase in increased defence spending over the next five years up to an additional 4 billion by 2020. this will return funding to the pre-sdsr level, and allow for 1 billion yearly expenditure on capital projects deemed to be of the highest strategic priority by the mod.we will rebuild our armed forces and restore them to their rightful place among the most professional, flexible and effective fighting forces in the world, able to meet the security demands of the modern era and react appropriately to any threat that the uk faces both now and in the future.retain our nuclear deterrentfaced with rogue states such as north korea and iran, which have developed advanced nuclear capabilities, ukip does not believe now is the time to be talking about or proposing nuclear disarmament and we support trident renewal.aircraft carriersthe two new queen elizabeth class aircraft carriersare superb operational platforms. ukip supports their deployment, while having reservations about the royal navys ability to man, operate and protect them: it could take nearly every ship in the current fleet to form an effective carrier group.we also have reservations about the development of the american f-35b lightning ii aircraft that are due to fly from the carriers by 2020, given the massive technical problems involved. this platform may never be mission-capable.we will investigate further whether it would be better to commission an off-the-shelf aircraft option and adapt the two queen elizabeth class carriers for non-vertical take-off and landings.increasing intelligence capabilitycurrently, british intelligence is fragmented between a number of agencies, including mi5, mi6, gchq and bbc monitoring. all have different funding streams and reportto different government departments. this generates a significant overlap in work and resources and risks exposing gaps in the system.ukip will create a new over-arching role of director of national intelligence (subject to confirmation hearing by the relevant commons select committee), who will be charged with reviewing uk intelligence and security, in order to ensure threats are identified, monitored and dealt with by the swiftest, most appropriate and legal means available. he or she will be responsible for bringing all intelligence services together; developing cyber security measures; cutting down on waste and encouraging information and resource sharing.tax on active serviceukip will revise the armed forces terms of service to ensure personnel on operational duty overseas do not pay income tax.eu armyukip wholly opposes the creation of a eu army. we will not tolerate british troops operating under european command, on british soil or elsewhere.believe in britainhonouring the military covenantwherever we send our brave heroes, whatever the danger, they never let us down. we will not let them down. we will honour the military covenant.ukip will create a dedicated minister for veterans, attached to the cabinet office to head up a veterans administration (va). the va will work with current mod veteran services and established charities to provide a single point of contact for veterans in a range of fields: health care, housing, counselling, education and training, rehabilitation, hospital care, access to veteran financial services, benefits and memorialisation. issues such as veteran homelessness, drug and alcohol abuse and mental health problems will also come under this remit, as will rolling out the following initiatives by 2020:a dedicated military hospitalwe believe members of our armed forces should have access to expert careservices, configured to meet the specific needs of serving forces personnel anda dedicated military hospital, so we will build one. it will provide specialist physical and mental health services and provide accommodation for 150 relatives or friends on site.hostels for homeless veterans9,000 homeless people are ex-forces, as are one in ten people sleeping rough on the streets, according to charities combat stress and crisis. that those who have been willing to defend our homeland have ended up without a home themselves is appalling.by 2020, ukip will build eight halfway house veterans hostels, each with 200 rooms and modelled on similar hostels already in operation. we will also built 500 affordable rent homes every year for ex-forces personnel.jobs for ex-servicemen and womenwe will guarantee the offer of a job in the police service, prison service or border force for anyone who has served in the armed forces for a minimum of 12 years. this policy will also help meet our pledge to fund an additional 6,000 full time positions across these three organisations. we will secure our borders, get more police on the streets, have safer prisons and honour the military covenant.boots to businessskills gained in the forces can be useful when running a small business. we will create a boots to business scheme to channel loans, grants and access to free professional advice and mentors to veterans who wish to set up and run their own businesses after leaving the forces.supporting our heroes and their familieskey roles for the va will include bereavement support; the issue of a veteran service card to ensure fast-track access to nhs mental health care; and the award of a national defence medal to all veterans, irrespective of rank or length of service.the current anomaly in the armed forces compensation scheme will be rectified, so no veteran has to use their war pension to pay for social care, whenever they were injured.these entitlements will be extended to service personnel from overseas. if they have shared the responsibility, stress and danger associated with military service, they should be entitled to exactly the same benefits as the man or woman who stood at their side.ukip 2015 manifesto > page 66veterans.britain is the only major countryin europe that does not haveforeign affairsbritains role in the world has changed significantly over the past few decades. instead of concerning ourselves with securing peace, british forces have been deployed around the world in a series of conflicts that seem to have worsened, instead of improved, our security situation.since 1997, labour and the conservative/lib dem coalition have deployed our armed forced to conflicts in afghanistan, kosovo, sierra leone, libya and iraq, while maintainingthe war on terror. they proposed military action in syria. more recently, parliament approved air strikes over iraqon islamic state. latest deployments include deterrent exercises in poland and the baltic states and a little- publicised, but substantial, deployment to nigeria.these interventions have stretched the uks armed forces to the limit and damaged our reputation in the international community. they have caused social problems here at home and jaded the british publics attitude towards involvement in future conflicts.iraq is a much more dangerous place today. so is libya. britains increasing involvement with european union expansionism is putting us increasingly, unnecessarily, at loggerheads with russia. the mod recently told ukraine it can count on any possible assistance in maintaining its territorial integrity. it is yet another sign that our political leaders are willing to put our troops in harms way at the behest of other countrys political agendas.we have to be clear: we should stand firmly alongside our allies around the world, but cannot continue committing troops into conflict at the drop of a hat  often under-resourced - and with a veterans policy that lets down those returning from the horrors of war.our commitment to nato must be upheld and we willnot shirk our responsibilities towards our allies, but ukip believes our parliamentary democracy should be consulted at every opportunity, before committing any taxpayer resources, or our forces, to combat situations.ukip acknowledges there are real, existential threats around the world. the rise of islamic extremism is at the forefront of this and, indeed, is possibly the most important battle of our generation. but the fight with and againstthis ideology is not best fought on a battlefield 3,000 miles away, but at home, where we have significant problems of radicalisation and incitement to terrorism.in europe, ukip would push for commitments from our european neighbours, as well as multi-national organisations, to guarantee the british sovereignty and territorial integrity of gibraltar and its waters.in the south atlantic, we must not negotiate or kowtow to argentine aggression over the falkland islands, but uphold and respect the islanders decision  through the self- determination of a recent referendum  their overwhelming desire and right to remain british.in the middle east, ukip wants to see nations at peace, but acknowledges that sectarianism, fuelled by historical western involvement, has rendered this all but impossible within a generation. we want to see a peaceful, two-state solution in israel and the palestinian territories.nigel farage mepukip leaderbritain is not merely a european country, but part of a global community, the anglosphere. beyond the eu and even the commonwealth are a network of nations that share not merely our language but our common law, democratic traditions and global trading interests. from india to the united states, new zealand to the caribbean, ukip would want to foster closer ties with the anglosphere.around the rest of the globe, ukips policies, including opening up from a small, euro-centric view of the world  wherein we are bound by eu membership not to negotiate our own trade deals  to becoming a sovereign nation that can trade with other countries, would once again inform our foreign policy.once unbound from the eu, britain would once again take her place in the family of nations as an independent, sovereign state, free to negotiate her own trade deals and determine her own foreign policy objectives. we believe nations which trade with one another are less likely to go to war with each other and, it is on this basis, that we would seek to create a more global britain, fully able to pursue her own interests.believe in britainoverseas aidultimately, ukip wants to help lift people out of poverty through trade, not aid. in the meantime, well continue to support the poorest people on earth through programmes that prioritise clean water and sanitation, vaccinations and disaster relief.nathan gill mepoverseas aid spokesmanukip 2015 manifesto > page 68the politics of austerity has taken its toll. hundreds of thousands of people in britain are relyingon foodbanks for survival. pensioners are freezing to death in winter as a result of rising fuelbills. the nhs is under severe financial strain. social care budgets have been slashed, leavingsome of the most needy in our society without adequate support. our young people have beenforced into debt by a 200 per cent increase in tuition fees.despite this severe economic hardship, mps and peers in all parties except ukip voted to massively increase foreign aid expenditure, borrowing money that will increase the national debt we leave to our children. it is now enshrined in law that we must pay 0.7 per cent of our gross national income (gni) on aid every year.the old parties pushed ahead with this expenditure regardless, ignoring considerable evidence that the money spent on overseas aid is not well directed or controlled and that much is wasted, lost to corruption or handed to countries already wealthy enough to have their own space programmes, nuclear weapons and even overseas aid programmes of their own.ukip will repeal recent legislation committing aid spending to 0.7 per cent of gni. we object to taxpayers money being sent to already economically thriving countries; countries with poor human rights records; and to money being spent on politically correct vanity projects that do nothing to lift developing nations out of poverty. we also believe charity should begin at home.ukip will bring overseas aid spending into line with that of the united states, which has a very similar level of deficit and overall debt as a percentage of gni to the uk. usa aid currently stands at 0.2 per cent of gni and this is what we will match.this change will be phased in over three years and the uk level of overseas aid will remain substantial, not falling below 4 billion per annum, more than given by spain and italy combined.projects in progress will be completed and any contractual obligations met.we will require all project expenditure to have clear, definable outcomes and future spending priorities will focus on emergency relief, healthcare, inoculation against preventable diseases and clean water and sanitation programmes.the contracts for delivery of these programmes will be offered to british providers first, following removal of the eu procurement directive.trade not aidremoving barriers to trade is a far more effective way to tackle poverty than giving aid hand-outs, which can provide incentives for corrupt leaders to stifle economic progress.this is where ukip will focus: having escaped from the eus protectionism, which has a negative impact on international development, we will be better placed to help provide sustainable livelihoods for the worlds poorest people, by giving them free access to the british market.the department for international development (dfid)dfid has already shown itself to be wasteful and lacking in focus on aid outcomes, yet its budget has been protected from recent government cuts. ukip takes a very different view: when dfids budget is reduced, we see no reason to keep difd running as an independent government department. we will close dfid and merge its essential functions into the foreign office, retaining asingle minister for overseas development.believe in britainbrexitwe have our own dream and our own task. we are with europe, but not of it. we are linked, but not combined. we are interested and associated, but not absorbed.sir winston churchillwhy we shoulduk business and employment legislation and immigration rules. it seeks greater control over our law enforcement services, our foreign affairs and tax policy. there is significant momentum behind plans for a eu-wide army and police force. the eu shares responsibility with usfor many other policy areas, including animal welfare, consumer protection, public health, space programmes, social policy, humanitarian aid and vocational training, to mention but a few.on these and many other issues, our elected westminster politicians are impotent. they pretend to have the power to influence these matters, but actually they have none. it is an out-of-sight, unaccountable, pan-european bureaucratic elite which has the final say and they do not consider britains best interests. the european parliament is no safeguard. it is a sham democracy: our meps are not allowed to generate or re-visit existing legislation. theycan only vote on decisions made by unelected commissioners and, even then, their vote can be ignored.we have nothing to lose and everything to gain by leaving the eu.despite the fact we are the worlds fifth largest economy and the seventh largest manufacturing nation, we will never again make a direct trade deal with any other nation until we leave the eu. we will never control our borders or manage immigration. we will never be able to prevent foreign trawlers plundering our seas of precious fish. if the eus plans for tax harmonisation come to fruition, soon we may find we cannot even set our own taxes. what else is coming down the tracks?a british exit from the eu, brexit, is the only choice open to us, if we are to make our ownlaws and control our own destiny. unless we leave, our democracy, our law-making powers and our sovereignty will continue to be salami- sliced away by the eu. genuine reform is impossible: successive eu presidents, senior officials and european prime ministers have confirmed there is no hope of britain negotiating any opt-outs, or special treatment.as far as our influence goes, we have very little anyway. as the european union has expanded, our vote share in the council of ministers,the european parliament, and the european commission, has declined to the point where it is now almost insignificant. we can vote no to proposals as often as we like, but unless other countries agree, measures will go on become british law anyway.for all these reasons and more, britain is better off out.leave the euukips position has been quite unfairly and misleadingly labelled anti-europe. we are not anti-europe, but we are firmly opposed to political integration within europe.back in 1972, we were told we were joining a common market. what we actually joined was a supranational political union. we have lost our rights of self-government in the stealth creation of a united states of europe, which has its own flag, national anthem, parliament, central bank, court of justice, a vast civil service, and fledgling military and police forces.the tentacles of the eu stretch into almost every area of our national life. the eu has complete control over british financial services, fishing, farming, energy and trade. it dictatesukip 2015 manifesto > page 70this is our roadmap to freedom: the process that will lead great britain out of the eu and into the world.a referendum on membershipukip believes british citizens should have an in/out referendum on our membership of the eu as soon as possible. our question of choice will be:do you wish britain to be a free, independent, sovereign democracy?only british citizens will be allowed to vote and there will be strict spending limits for both yes and no camps, together with fair, balanced and equal media coverage of both arguments.following a vote to leave, we have two legal options: we repeal the european communities act 1972 and leave immediately we activate article 50 of the lisbon treaty and notify the european council that the uk has decided to leave the eu in two years time.the second option provides for a sensible, orderly exit and this is the option we prefer.preparation for withdrawal from the euhaving activated article 50 of the lisbon treaty, we will set a fixed date, two years ahead, on which we intend to leave, while recognising we could leave earlier. then we will begin amicable negotiations.british exit will be a huge relief for many other eu members, who have known all along that the vast majority of the british people find the idea of political union with the rest of europe abhorrent. they are fully aware that we would never have joined the eu, had the political nature of the enterprise not been deliberately concealed from the electorate in 1975.our leaving will set them free to have full political union,if that is what they really want and set us free to make the most of all our links with the commonwealth, with north america, australasia, much of africa, the indian sub- continent and all the other countries where english is the first or second language, as well as, of course, with europe and the eu itself.the uk is the eus largest export market and, militarily, the strongest european member of nato. with russia once more flexing its muscles and controlling much of the energy supplies to western europe, the other eu member states will have more than a casual interest in making sure their relationship with us remains amicable.agreeing brexit: the objectiveswhat do we wish to achieve from our negotiations with the eu? our objectives are clear:firstly, we will secure trade agreements with the eu, the 40 nations with trade agreements with the eu and other nations of interest to us. as a g7 member, a leading world economy, the fifth largest by gdp, this will be a rapid process in most cases. countries already trading with the eu will want to continue seamless trade relationships; other world nations will want to forge new trade alliances with the uk; and all nations will find it easier to deal with the uk directly.as a minimum, we will seek continued access on free-trade terms to the eus single market. our custom is valuable to the eu now and will continue to be so following brexit.secondly, there will be a wide range of issues on which we will want to continue to co-operate. these include extradition treaties, cross-border intelligence, disaster relief, accommodation of refugees, pan-eu healthcare arrangements and various other cultural projects. we will also maintain our membership of pan-european institutions, such as the european space agency and the european medicines agency.agreeing brexit: the processthe foreign secretary will oversee the brexit process and establish a post-eu secretariat, with responsibility for:   co-ordinating the disengagementreviewing of eu legislation and directives as they affect each area of governmentdetermining the post-eu status of all eu treatiesre-establishing the uks membership of the world trade organisationcommencing free-trade agreement negotiations with non-eu countriesagreeing a uk/eu trade agreement agreeing a uk/eu brexit treatyfor 40 years the uk and the eu have been pulling in different directions: brexitwill leave us free to fulfil our different destinies, while enjoying mutuallybeneficial and prosperous relationships with each other.believe in britainukip 2015 manifesto > page 72financebelieve in britainukip five yeartable 1phased budget changes 2015-2020budgetary savings2015-162016-172017-182018-192019-20net eu contributions7.508.509.00overseas aid phased down to 0.2% of gnidecc budget cuts (excluding levies)nhs medical insurance recovery from migrants and visitors ineligible for free treatment hgv road user levy increased for non uk vehicles (britdisc)4.70 8.74 0.50 1.00 0.50 0.60all figures in bn10.11 10.56 11.09 1.00 1.00 1.00 0.70 0.80 0.90 0.04 0.04 0.04hs2 cancellation0.801.701.703.304.00fake charities (non charitable expenditure funded by government)0.250.500.500.500.50barnett formula replaced with needs based allocation of spending1.503.004.004.755.50total savings8.2515.5425.5529.4532.03ukip 2015 manifesto > page 74fiscal plantax and expenditure2015-162016-172017-182018-192019-20income tax mid-rate of 30% increased to 55,000 by 2019-201.181.982.933.88nhs provision1.502.002.503.003.00carers allowance increased to level of job seekers allowance0.400.400.400.400.40inheritance tax abolished by 20200.922.043.425.12ministry of defence capital projects0.500.701.001.001.00jobs for ex-servicemen and women0.120.200.220.230.24hospital car parking fees abolished0.200.200.200.200.20transferable income tax personal allowance increased to 1,500 by 2019-200.030.100.200.30business rates cut - 20% relief on premises with a rateable value up to 50,0001.151.161.181.20total spending7.4715.0321.1126.6131.84net budgetary impact0.780.514.442.840.19table 1 (continued)income tax personal allowance increased to 13,000 by 2019-20social care provisionbedroom tax abolishedrestore defence budget to level prior to strategic defence and security review 2010 veterans administrationhigher education tuition fees abated after 5 years for stemm students national referendastamp duty relief and incentive grants to build houses on brownfield sites provision for other policy itemsall figures in bn2.03 4.07 6.17 8.14 0.60 1.00 1.20 1.20 1.20 0.50 0.50 0.50 0.50 0.50 1.40 2.00 2.60 2.90 3.00 0.12 0.32 0.35 0.35 0.44 1.79 1.81 1.85 1.89 1.98 0.04 0.04 0.04 0.04 0.040.25 0.50 0.50 0.50 0.30 0.30 0.40 0.50 0.70believe in britainukip 2015 manifesto > page 76